AREAS OF ATTENTION
InfoCert Group believes that the eIDAS Regulation and the creation of an interoperable Digital
Single Market for trust services is crucial to build a digital society based on trust, security and
protection of natural and legal person in Europe.
InfoCert operates in more than 20 Countries in Europe, providing Qualified Trust Services and eIdentity solutions in different vertical markets: we enjoy a privileged point of view on the strengths
and weaknesses of the Regulation and we’ve seen the different implementation approaches
across Europe.
In the following paragraphs we will provide some points of attention and some ideas of practical
amendments that could help to evolve the current situation toward a better interoperability in
order to foster the spread of cross-border trusted transactions.

1.1

IDENTIFICATION METHODS

Article 24 of the Regulation offers a wide range of defined identification methods, plus letter d)
that permits to the QTSP to submit for approval to the Conformity Assessment Body an additional
identification method, that gives the same level of assurance and security of the concrete
presence.
InfoCert believes that the aim of article 24 shall be strengthen because it permits to continuously
adapt the eIDAS ecosystem including or excluding identification methods enabled or deprecated
by technological evolution.
Some standardization bodies are working actively on the definition of standards and guidelines for
some of the new identification methods (i.e. ETSI for video-identification): these initiatives are
important to improve overall security, but these standards should not become binding
regulations.
In our opinion, QTSP should be able to quickly dismiss deprecated technologies and, at the same
time, have the option to adopt more secure, innovative and technologically advanced
identification methods and solutions without having to wait for a new standard or regulation to
become effective.

1.2

MANAGEMENT OF PRIVATE KEYS

The actual formulation of the Annex II of the Regulation permits to any Qualified Trust Service
provider to generate or manage electronic signature creation data on behalf of the signatory.
We believe that this possibility doesn’t guarantee the highest level of protection to the holder of
the qualified certificate, simply because a TSP that has been qualified for a service different from
signature and seal might not necessarily possess all the capabilities required to properly manage
certificate keys.
We suggest restricting the possibility to manage private keys just to QTSPs that have been
qualified for Qualified Electronic Signature, Qualified Seals or Qualified Website Authentication
Certificates.

1.3

QUALIFICATION OF SIGNATURE CREATION DEVICES AND SIGNATURE SERVICE

The actual process to certify a signature creation device is cumbersome and brings to an odd and
fragmented situation where:
- there are many certification standards and approaches,
- the perimeter of certification differs between both certification bodies and signature
devices,
- the patch management is outside the certified perimeter, so in case of a new vulnerability
this cannot be patched without a re-certification of the device, often forcing QTSPs to keep
unsafe devices in order to maintain the certification status,
- unlimited certifications are granted to some classes of devices on one extreme while some
protection profile might prove to be practically impossible to be fully respected on the
opposite extreme.
We need to simplify the acceptance and management of QSCD without giving up security and
getting to a more homogeneous approach between Member States.
Considering the role of ENISA, the Commission and the Member States could entitle such authority
to define a unique schema for security certification of devices, shaped around the already
existing and accepted international security schemas as Common Criteria EAL 4+.
We notice a lack on eIDAS in regulating the remote signature service: even if the trust provider is
qualified, the certificate is qualified, the signature creation device is qualified, when the subject
uses his/her private keys there is a part of the overall process that is not qualified and doesn’t
follow any specific rule.
The definition of a qualification schema or, if not possible, functional recommendations on the
remote signature process could improve the overall trust and security and the protection of the
subject. In that regards, there are already available some (albeit partial) standards like the ones
defined by CSC Consortium.
Therefore, we need to avoid the risk to overburden the overall system with bureaucratic
procedures that don’t add much to security: the risk is to create unnecessary frictions in the
Qualified Signature user experience that will impact on the adoption of QCert in the Single Market
to the benefit of less secure and less trustworthy solutions. A clear example of such unnecessary
friction is the provision of mandatory detailed instructions on how the document to be signed
should be displayed before the signature.

1.4

ROLE OF CABS AND SUPERVISORY BODIES

The creation of a trustworthy, interoperable eIDAS-based Digital Single Market is directly affected
by the quality and homogeneity of the approaches of Supervisory Bodies and Conformity
Assessment Bodies.
We need more harmonized national qualification procedures between Member States,
smoothing the divergence in approaches of the Supervisory Bodies but, at the same time, we also
need to avoid that bureaucratic and too rigid interpretation prevails, destroying the spaces to do
business and opening the market to low-compliant, less-secure, less-trustworthy but, at the same
time, highly usable solutions.

We believe that even the role of Conformity Assessment Bodies should change; today each QTSP is
audited twice: by the CAB that – with different approaches throughout Europe – performs deep
audits on implemented services and processes, and by the Supervisory Body that, not always fully
trusting the CAB report, re-executes the same audits and analysis.
There’s a need to clarify the liability schema for CABs’ activity: if a CAB is liable toward the SB on
the audited perimeter, the SB should trust more the conformity report and play the role of ex-post
auditing authority over QTSP. Otherwise, the auditing process should be revised avoiding to
QTSPs the unnecessary costs of a double, redundant layer of audit.

1.5

SUPERVISORY BODIES AND EIDAS ENFORCEMENT

The creation of a Digital Single market passes even through the generalized acceptance and
implementation of eIDAS Regulation in the internal processes of each Member State.
We have seen situations of MS introducing specific requirements creating unnecessary national
barriers. For example, some countries demand specific technical requirements and specific data in
the certificates in order to use it for accessing public services or in public tender and procurement
processes. This approach undermine interoperability and forces multi-national companies to use
different certificates to operate in different Member States. We suggest a stricter control from the
Commission on similar situations.
In addition, we believe that one of the greatest strengths of eIDAS is its universality, i.e. its ability
to build an infrastructure of trust accessible to business in all industries and sectors. Many of these
sectors are regulated by national authorities in charge of issuing Circulars, Orders and second-level
regulation. Even if the eIDAS Commission has been able to influence different Directives and
Regulations (ex. AML V Directive, PSD2 Implementation, etc), many National sectoral authorities
are still ruling without considering the existence of a super-national qualified trust services
Regulation. The result is a fragmented situation where a foreigner QTSP is often not in the
conditions to compete on equal terms with local players.
We suggest to evolve Supervisory Bodies toward the role of eIDAS enforcing authorities, with
the responsibility to influence and even sanction national authorities that are blocking or slowing
the proper and smooth application of the eIDAS Regulation.

1.6

QWAC, VALIDATION SERVICES, DELIVERY SERVICES

The main priorities for implementing the Regulation have been so far the development of the
national eID schemas and the security of QCERT for signatures and seals. We believe there are
three additional priority areas that the Commission should focus on: enforcing the acceptance of
QWACs, make available a single validation service and develop a European-wide interoperable
system of qualified delivery.
Qualified Webserver Authentication Certificates are a powerful tool to enhance the security of
server-to-server transactions and now are bringing trust and interoperability into PSD2
transactions between PSPs. Unfortunately, the CA-Browser forum is creating resistance and
tensions in accepting it, substantially ignoring the trust and auditing framework behind the QWAC.
We suggest a norm to force the browser providers operating in Europe to accept the eIDAS
compliant QWAC in the same way TSL certificates are accepted.
The validation of the signature is crucial for the owner of the signed document, that should be in
the position to verify with a secure, free and independent service the validity of the signature.
Today this seems to be a market failure, because the private sector doesn’t have the incentive to
create the validation service, being no revenues attached to it.
European Commission DSS is a partial response: lacking a clear commitment over the value of the
service, the liability schema, the service level guaranteed, it is under-used while instead it could
play an important role in the implementation of eIDAS enabled processes. We believe that this
experience should become stable and regulated, with a Qualified Signature/Seal Validation
service provided and managed by the EU. A second option, if a more decentralized architecture is
preferred, would be that each Supervisory Body operates a local validation service based on a
common European framework developed by the Commission, to avoid differences of approaches
and strengthen the interoperability.
Finally, we believe that an interoperable, EU based Qualified Electronic Delivery Service could
enhance security and trust in the Digital Single Market, permitting the exchange of documents,
information, electronic invoices, contents between natural and legal persons in cross-border
communication.
Nowadays there are two big delivery services in Europe: PEPPOL system and the Italia PEC – Posta
Elettronica Certificata (registered email) that, with more than 10 million of active accounts, is
probably the largest e-delivery service with legal value in the world. Considering that the PEC
system is now evolving toward a full compliance with the QERDS requirements and the REM
technical standard, there are all the preconditions to extend the reach of such system in other
Member States. eIDAS revision process could help specifying that the requirement of
identification of sender and receiver stated in article 44 can be practically met with the
identification at the creation of the delivery account and the authentication each time a message
is sent and read. The actual formulation stress just the “identification”, and seems depicting a
situation where each time a message is sent or received there is an identification process in
compliance with article 24, requirement that would inevitably create an incoherent process, with
a poor user experience mining its wide adoption.
