United Internet welcomes the opportunity to comment on the
evaluation of the eIDAS Regulation. WEB.DE, GMX and 1&1 are the
first European providers to be certified by TUEViT and the Federal
Network Agency in accordance with the eIDAS Regulation and thus
offer electronic delivery services as qualified trust service providers.

We fully support the EU-wide standards introduced by the eIDAS
Regulation for the unique identification of all participants and the
digital signing of electronic cross-border data transmission. The EU
has thus created the basis for Europe-wide, legally valid electronic
communication and secure electronic identification. The introduction
of eIDAS as a successful European instrument has helped to
promote trust and acceptance in legally secure communication within
Europe and to increase availability and use.

WEB.DE, GMX and 1&1 have mastered the successful
implementation of qualified trust services in compliance with
European standards and national legislation, but also see a need for
improvement in practice. The upcoming evaluation should therefore
be used to identify and improve weaknesses in the current regulation
with the aim of further increasing the use of and demand for secure
and trustworthy online identification and authentication.
In our view, the evaluation should take into account the
following requirements in particular:

1. Mandatory interoperability:

The mandatory introduction and guarantee of interoperability
between providers in the area of the qualified trust service for
enrolment and mail services is essential. In the future, the regulation
must ensure a mandatory regulation on interoperability and not leave
this to pure market mechanisms.
Furthermore, it would be welcome to extend these requirements to
the non-qualified services.

The regulation correctly mentions cross-border interoperability and the
recognition of qualified certificates as preconditions for the cross-border 
recognition of qualified electronic signatures and specifies
which requirements a certified service must fulfil in terms of data
transport or electronic signatures. At the same time, however, it does
not specify which access requirements the participants must have for
data exchange via two eIDAS services. In practice, this leads to very
different market requirements within the EU member states.

This interpretability within the eIDAS Regulation leads to different
requirements and application of different standards of conformity (e.g.
substantial vs. high), market access barriers for trust service providers
and different barriers for products in the EU Member States. In
particular, market entry barriers are of great concern, as member
states with a lower standard do not accept harmonisation at a higher
level. This in turn creates incentives for providers to establish
themselves in the member states with lower standards and the market
shifts to these states. Providers who are subject to a higher standard
are thus no longer competitive in the European environment.

Requirements:

◼ Harmonisation of national rules regarding identification with
European standards.
◼ Creation of a binding description of interoperability in the area
of delivery services.◼ Equal regulations / acceptance for all identification
procedures at national and European level (e.g. for
VideoIdent and BankIdent).
◼ Implementation of an overarching supervisory body that
ensures compatibility and interaction between the various
supervisory authorities and review bodies and ensures
equivalence for the creation of a level playing field at
European level.
◼ Adopt implementing acts to ensure the implementation of
uniform conditions.
◼ Creation of added value, genuine communication solutions, in
the context of which a response can also be made when
documents are delivered in the same process.

2. Promote national policy-making and harmonisation

A prerequisite for legally secure communication at European level is
harmonisation at national level. The existence of different national
standards (e.g. De-Mail vs. ePostbrief vs. beA vs. service portals)
reduces the acceptance and use of trust services and slows down
digitisation and thus the use of trust services in Europe.

In Germany, for example, various systems are currently used for
trustworthy digital data exchange, such as De-Mail, the special
electronic lawyer's mailbox (beA) or the electronic court and
administrative mailbox (EGVP) - the systems are largely sealed off
from each other and thus do not enable communication with each
other. This leads to an unnecessarily complicated situation for the
consumer and unnecessarily increases the barriers to the use of
eIDAS-certified services.

Requirements:
◼ Implemented standards must be implemented and applied
at national level.
◼ Dissolving national digital parochialism: harmonising national
and European standards (De-Mail - eIDAS)
- "EGVP/OSCI").
◼ Use of existing standards for eGovernment, ERV and other
mandatory electronic communication.◼ Use cases: Use of different products on the basis of a
uniform standard.
