Workday supports the important goals of eIDAS, namely establishing interoperable
electronic identification schemes (eID) and the development of a European internal
market for electronic trust services. However, while the implementation of eIDAS has
demonstrated some positive advancement of these goals, the Regulation could also use
updating in light of rapidly advancing technology and consumer practices. Only by
providing certainty on the legal validity of both public and private digital services across
all technology choices, will businesses, consumers, and government realize the full
benefits of eIDAS.

Expanded Definition of Trust Services

As more and more aspects of everyday life, from banking to applying for work, are being
conducted digitally, the definition of “trust services” should be expanded to include not
just authenticating a signature or other means of verification (such as a seal or time
stamp), but also to include services verifying information and credentials (including
diplomas and other educational achievements) provided by electronic means. For
example, a nurse can prove various required qualifications and skills by providing
certification to a hospital upon applying for a job, and a qualified trust service provider
can then quickly authenticate those credentials. Under the current Regulation, a
qualified trusted service provider can only provide authentication of the applicant
themselves, but the nursing certification must still be independently verified, which is a
time consuming process.

Expanding the definition of trust services to expressly include the authentication of any
information or transaction, not just signatures or seals, ultimately will create more utility,
and in turn greater adoption of eID.

Legal Recognition of Blockchain-based Records and Transactions

Current EU law, including eIDAS, leaves some ambiguity regarding the use of
blockchain to conduct legal transactions. As the use of blockchain has quickly become
more common and widespread, Workday supports policies that give legal effect to
blockchain-based records and transactions, including transactions based on information
and identity authenticated by using blockchain and distributed ledger technology.

An update to eIDAS should provide a clear recognition that electronic transactions and
trust services conducted on the blockchain or a distributed ledger are legally valid, and
that information created, stored, or secured on or through a blockchain can in turn be
provided as part of the expanded definition of trusted service.

This could be done by amending eIDAS to add the concept of a “qualified trusted
blockchain or distributed ledger” capable of issuing legally binding trust services.
Several aspects of the existing requirements for qualified electronic signatures in the
Regulation are highly impractical for blockchain networks (especially open or
“permissionless” networks). Conversely, certain configurations of blockchain networks
could raise unique risks that the Regulation did not contemplate and does not address.
Amendments to the Regulation should seek to resolve these issues. For example, if all
validating nodes of a blockchain system must be qualified trust service providers (or
qualified electronic signature creation devices) in order to issue qualified electronic
signatures, this will increase transaction cost and impose significant costs—and
potentially also liability—on the operators of any such nodes.
