Synthesis of the Thales DIS position - August 2020

The eIDAS regulation has been a valuable milestone toward a common basis for trusted digital identities and trust services. Thales DIS
welcomes the assessment of the 2014 regulation and supports its objective to make easier and safer the use of online services while giving
people more control over their personal data and privacy.

Option 1:

In this respect, harmonization as mentioned in option1 appears as a necessary step to establish solid foundations across the EU, on top of
which further enhancements and extended usages of eIDs under eIDAS can be fostered. In particular, deeper harmonization of certifications
will bring more confidence and trust to stakeholders, and will finish clarifying the eIDAS security requirements and Levels of Assurance –
LoAs -. The recent adoption of the Cybersecurity Act and the coming EU CC scheme arrive at the right time to smoothly achieve such
harmonization.

Option 2:

Sovereign eIDs are assets the private sector could advantageously leverage on to develop its own identification frameworks. Typically,
giving to banks the capability to rely on national eIDs solutions to implement strong digital ID verification would bring trust and
convenience to their KYC procedures. Promoting synergies between the eIDAS regulation and AML and PSD directives would accelerate the
deployment of national eID solutions at assurance level high, and would stimulate their adoption by private actors.

To boost such adoption and further structure private eID frameworks, a dedicated regulation should give a mandate to European
Standardization Organisations (ESOs) to define the necessary harmonized standards for the reuse of notified eID schemes by the private
sector. This harmonized standard should address private eIDs and attribute providers as well as private services accepting them (also called
relying parties). It should consider data privacy, identity and attribute proofing, and strong binding of private attributes with a notified eID
under eIDAS.

This dedicated regulation should also identify or request the development of a European Certification Scheme, under the CyberAct, when it
comes to the evaluation of private eID schemes. This Certification Scheme should benefit from the harmonized certifications processes
defined by option1 for sovereign eIDs. Finally, this dedicated regulation should provide the necessary means to ensure a clear legal
framework and a liability shift for private actors.

This dedicated regulation would be a pragmatic alternative to option2 while keeping its main objective to extend the scope of eID
regulations to the private sector. It would decrease the overall risk of identity theft while enhancing user privacy in online services.

Option 3:

A European Digital Identity Scheme as introduced in option 3 could quickly be achieved with a European label on top of national eIDs
notified by Member States.
