eIDAS has been the first regulation to cover the digital world replacing the previous electronic
signature directive from 1999 and have created the first federated Digital Identity scheme in the world.

By giving a legal definition of electronic identification and electronic authentication, the European
Commission and the Members states have created the first legal definition of what is the Digital
Identity : it is corresponding to the sum of electronic identification (who I am) and electronic
authentication (How I prove it).

This definition come with a complete set of requirements (enrollment, issuance, usage and security
measures, peer review etc.).

The eIDAS regulation has also created a legal certainty for the on-line onboarding. This has opened
a completed new field of opportunities for European Start-ups and SMEs by creating new business
models. We have seen since 2014 the creation hundreds of European startups and SMEs proposing
eIDAS compliant on-boarding solutions, liveness detection modules, biometrics identification and
verification.

It is critical to protect these critical assets and developed further our European ecosystem be
continuing to develop the current eIDAS regulation possibilities.

These current eIDAS possibilities are still not yet fully realized but are in a very good way, and
European Startups and SMEs need stability and time to growth. Business Angels may be also
impacted with any large revision of the eIDAS regulation and may be stopped some investments
decisions in start-ups and SME’s.

Any drastic change on the current eIDAS regulation will destabilized this European precious
ecosystem.

CLR Labs is strongly supporting the option 1 proposed by the European Commission, the two
others will create bad messages and signals to the market and may stop some current projects.
The current eIDAS projects may be delayed from to 2 or 3 years waiting for both the co-decision
and the implementing acts are fully completed.

Furthermore, the option 2 will bring electronic identification and electronic authentication toward
server based or cloud-based solution and removing the necessary local interaction with the user
(using a mobile application, a USB token, an eID card etc…).

The user will be losing its sole control of these critical processes (identification and
authentication).

Centralizing these two critical processes will benefits to global and large actors and not to the
European start-ups and SMEs.

The option 1 will be helping the current eIDAS European eco-system to better benefits from the
current opportunity of the current eIDAS regulation. Using implementing acts and guidelines will
help in getting the fine tuning of the European interoperability.

By example, and based on our competence domain, the article 24.d would need to be complemented
by a guideline mentioning that European Laboratories ISO/IEC 17025 accredited on the ISO/IEC
30107 standards (presentation attack detection) and having a serious evaluation methodology is the
way to prove to the eIDAS CAB (Conformity Assessment Body) that the proposed solution is
compliant against the requirements of the article 24.d.

This will be a great help to the eIDAS CAB auditors. They can rely on evaluation report issued by
accredited laboratories and reduce the potential fraud linked to the identity spoofing when Biometrics
verification is used (Facial recognition, Fingerprint presentation, vocal recognition etc…).
The second challenge is to make sure that the biometrics solution and the associated evaluation
laboratories are GDPR compliant and are putting the right security, organizational measure to manage
sensible data such as biometrics ones.

In this respect, CLR Labs has clear mission statement: Toward Biometrics certified with European
Values.
We believed that a European Biometrics Certification Scheme should be prepared within the Cyber
Security Certification framework of the European Cybersecurity Act. It is a question of digital
sovereignty and alignment with the European Values.
