With eIDAS, the EU laid the foundations and a predictable legal framework for people, companies and public administrations to safely
access services and carry out transactions online and across borders.

In the context of this Revision of eIDAS Regulation – EUid initiative, digital identity is definitely a critical enabler of transactions, in a hyperconnected economy, and Orange, as a multi-service operator, welcomes an ambitious approach aiming at reinforcing & extending the
effectiveness of eIDAS.

Digital secure services (public: e.g. e-Government, e-Health and private sector: finance…) will be massively deployed on mobiles. This is
why Orange considers Option 2 proposed in the Roadmap as key to make it a success. Option 3 is also very promising with regards to the
creation of a universally accepted EUid to access online public and private services, when identification is necessary.

However, service providers in public or private sector cannot so far easily deploy their secure services on mobiles. They are unable to
address all smartphones, and to provide a sustainable level of security due to the lack of a favorable framework (contractual, technical…)
and to the market fragmentation. There is also strong dependency on key global players, like device manufacturers or OS vendors who are
deploying their own technology and tend to promote their own services.

To improve this situation, Orange has initiated together with the industry the standardization of a generic structure for hosting secured
services and sensitive data (attributes, credentials, attestations…) in a hardware element of the mobile. This hosting should be
interoperable and accessible to all service providers from their back-end(s) via standardized interfaces and without significant dependency
on specific actors. Sensitive user-based information would be safely stored in a hardware element of the mobile and in an isolated way
ensuring data protection & privacy in line with the GDPR.

The standardization work started in Feb. 2020 in a dedicated GSMA group gathering many key actors like device manufacturers, OS
makers, chipset vendors and mobile operators worldwide. The requirements should be completed by Q3 2020 and the technical
specification by Q1 2021, in close cooperation with relevant standards bodies (eg. Global Platform).

This standard solution for secured services could be considered when designing Option 2, by extending the scope of eIDAS to devices.

Indeed, it builds an interoperable and secured framework for the deployment of digital ID and other trust services on devices. For example,
GSMA defined use cases include identity services supporting the eIDAS level substantial, as well as digitalisation of secured documents (eg.
driving license on mobile).

Furthermore, the availability of a EUid scheme (Option 3) on mobiles would ease and harmonize the deployment of secured applications
which require user’s identification across the EU. The standardized solution for secured services could also be considered to implement this
Option 3, as a way to reduce the current fragmentation.

To summarise, Orange welcomes this Revision of eIDAS Regulation – EUid initiative. Especially, Options 2 and 3 will ease the deployment of
secured applications on mobiles in the public and private sectors offering many advantages:
Innovation and competitiveness in public and private sector with increased trust services coverage in device environment.
Cybersecurity, with a certified security solution meeting the expectations of National and European public authorities.
Digital sovereignty, with the ability to deploy services without significant dependency on proprietary solutions.

Orange would be glad to share more details about the progress on standardization for secured services on mobiles and explore synergies
with the eIDAS review.
