In general, the Commission’s assessment of the current situation seems adequate, especially since
interoperability and extensions to digital validation are crucial for a sovereign digital market in Europe.
Because of the different pace of digitalization across the EU, several Member States have already
implementing digital validation on top of identification. This leads to fragmentation which further
weakens the fundament for a single digital market unless common solutions are developed.

When it comes to the 3 options outlined in the roadmap, we believe that the they should not be
mutually exclusive but instead be combined in order to achieve a satisfactory outcome. For specific
remarks and recommendations, please see the comments below.

Specific remarks on Option 1

We welcome the suggestion of making specific guidelines on identification which we assume will
include fully remote processes and will reduce the emphasis on technology neutrality in favor of being
specific to ensure uniformity and alignment in implementations, especially if such uniformity is based
on open and already recognized international standards and specifications.

However, we see a limited impact of this option compared to the current situation and we view this as
minimum requirements which need to be put in place as a starting point for even considering the next
options.

Specific remarks on Option 2

We fully support the notion of the provision of attributes and attestation of those. In terms of
organization we are doubtful if this should be organized as trust services per se. In our view, the source
holding the information needs to be qualified and provide easy to check seals to the attestation but
we do not see this as a trust service in the normal definition of this terminology.

In terms of financial services an entity holding a banking license should be able to emit attested KYC
data without becoming a trust service provider or another regulated entity like notaries, companies
that provide various registries services or local municipality authorities. Such approach will allow
market participants to compete in related service delivery. Each market participant could decide which
level of trust is enough for him. We believe this is the case for most use cases including attested
attributes and where a requirement defining this as a trust service will only introduce a middleman
providing little value and obscuring the source and the responsibility of the attributes. Trust service
providers could coexist in such a market and their services could be mandatory in some use cases.

To capture the value of this suggestion the required attributes need to be defined and harmonized,
including the additional regulatory required attributes especially for the Financial Services sector. We
also recommend that market participants should not be prohibited from further additional nonregulatory required attribute provisions that could be related to the particular industry or a region, for
instance. However, there is an inherent risk to create a non-harmonized market by inclusion of such
local attributes. If these recommendations are not implemented, the question is whether Option 2
provides value at all for cross-border usage and for achieving a single digital market. For the financial
market this was indeed the conclusion of the EU expert group on remote KYC.

Furthermore, we recommend an extension of minimum mandatory identification attributes to a full
set of identification attributes, ideally complemented with due diligence attributes so that a KYC
process could be fully digitized, a shift from central gateways (such as fully centralized eIDAS nodes
and federated eID approaches) towards decentral nodes acting as trusted source gateways for
respective KYC attributes, enhancing data protection/data privacy (a single node should not know
every customer interaction) and increase cyber security (node redundancy).

We cannot see Option 2 being put in place without Option 1 as a precondition. In our view this option
will have a significant beneficiary impact if data standardization pertinent to use cases is done also. If
no such data sets are defined the benefit could be questionable.

Specific remarks on Option 3

We believe a common scheme would provide an invaluable strengthening of the use and deployment
of electronic identity. A fully harmonized eID scheme in the EU would move from the currently very
different schemes toward one common standard which would significantly contribute towards
adoption both from a purely technical and economic perspective, but also increase the adoption in
terms of ease of acceptance and usage. We believe this should be developed through a public-privatepartnership. This would enable market competition to take effect and result in a situation similar to
the payment industry.

The authoritative source for onboarding an identity would be a Member State. The entities onboarding
would be highly regulated and/or supervised public and private entities. The form factor of the identity
would be highly standardized to ensure portability in the same way passports have always been and
identity cards are becoming based on the EU wide standardization of national ID cards mandating
adherence to the ICAO standards. Acceptance would at least follow the patterns we see from passports
and payment cards where offline validation will be predominant and optional online verification can
be accomplished subsequently at the issuer. Ideally, verifications are done online in real-time with
offline capabilities (e.g. via mobile phones or NFC cards or similar).

We see the merits of enforcing acceptance and mandatory notification of national schemes but would
fear that such measures could be seen as too prescriptive and raising questions about privacy and
remove the focus from the inherent value of the proposals.
As already mentioned in the context of the other options, we see little rationale for Option 3 unless
Option 2 and 1 are implemented, as well. In terms of impact we do not see a major contribution from
Option 3 on itself. The major benefit of Option 3 would be to enhance uniformity and harmonization
and thus probably lead to a higher adoption even without a prescription on acceptance. The
combination of this increase in adoption and the benefits of Option 1 and 2 will together give a muchneeded enhancement and push towards digital sovereignty.

Conclusion

The current eIDAS Regulation update will significantly impact EU and national digital developments,
related investments and digital environment role within EU and Member States during upcoming
years. Therefore, the eIDAS Regulation update should incorporate the major aspects from all 3 options.

In terms of enabling a deep single digital market the addition of attributes and defining cross border
data sets is crucial for enabling digital verification at the European level and to avoid the Member
States turning into “digital islands”. This would be instrumental in promoting the same goals as the
single digital gateway and the only once principle also for the private sector.

Recommendations
Our recommendation is to implement all three proposed options in a coordinated approach, e.g. first
the harmonized attribute definitions, then the trusted service provider determination, followed by the
respective liability framework and lastly by the necessary RTS. Such approach will allow that the
subsequent option components will be implemented in a more efficient and effective way, allow to
collect as much as possible feedback from the market and Member States and the reuse of the latest
technology developments.
