We concur with the assessments on the description of the current situation. Especially interoperability
and extensions to digital validation is crucial if Europe is to have a sovereign common market in 10
years based on the pace of digitalization. There is a clear trend of entrenchment of national walled
garden development in this area currently.

As digitalization is happening at different pace in EU we find several member States already
implementing digital validation on top of identification. As this happens within the national boundary,
we are facing the development of digital islands further weakening the fundament for a single digital
market unless common solutions are developed. In our view this is urgent as the resistance will
increase dramatically once these islands are entrenched.

We understand that the outlined options are not mutually exclusive and should in all likelihood be
combined in order to achieve a satisfactory outcome - for example implementing option 3 appears
difficult without inclusion of parts of options 1 and 2.

Option 1
We welcome the suggestion of making specific guidelines on identification which we assume to
include fully remote processes and to reduce the emphasis on technology neutrality in favor of being
specific to ensure uniformity and alignment in implementations, especially if such uniformity is based
on open and already recognized international standards and specifications.

However, we foresee a limited impact of this option compared to the current situation and we view
this as baseline requirements which needs to be put in place as a foundation for even considering the
next options.

Option 2
We fully support the notion of provision of attributes and attestation of those. In terms of organization
we are doubtful if this should be organized as trust services per se. In our view the source holding the
information needs to be qualified and provide easy to check seals to the attestation, but we do not
see this as a trust service in the normal definition of this terminology. In terms of financial services an
entity holding a banking license should be able to emit attested KYC data without becoming a trust
service provider or regulated other entities like a Notaries, companies that provide various registries
services or local municipality authorities. Such approach will allow market participants to compete in
related service delivery, each market participant could decide which level of trust is enough for him.
We believe this is the case for most use cases including attested attributes and where a requirement
defining this as a trust service will only introduce a middleman providing little value and obscuring the
source and the responsibility of the attributes.
Trust service providers could coexist in such market, their services could be mandatory in some use
cases.

To capture the value of this suggestion the required attributes need to be defined and harmonized
between the member states, including the additional regulatory required attributes especially for the
Financial Services sector. We also recommend that market participants should not be prohibited from
further additional non-regulatory required attribute provisions that could be related to the particular
industry or a region as example. However care must be taken since there is an inherent risk to create
a non harmonized market by inclusion of such «local» attributes.
If these recommendations are not implemented, question remains if Option 2 provides value at all for
cross border usage and for enhancing a single digital market. For the financial market this was indeed
the conclusion of the EU expert group.

Furthermore, we recommend
• an extension of minimum mandatory identification attributes to a full set of identification attributes,
ideally complemented with due diligence attributes so that a KYC process could be fully digitized
• a shift from central gateways (such as fully centralized eIDAS nodes and federated eID approaches)
towards decentral nodes acting as trusted source gateways for respective KYC attributes, enhancing
data protection/data privacy (a single node should not know every customer interaction) and increase
cyber security (node redundancy)

We cannot see option 2 being put in place without 1 being done as a precursor. In our judgement this
option will have a significant beneficiary impact if data standardization pertinent to use cases is done
also. If no such data sets are defined the benefit could be questionable.

Option 3
We believe a common scheme would provide an invaluable strengthening of the use and deployment
of electronic identity. A fully harmonized eID scheme covering Europe would move from the current
widely different schemes toward one common standard which would significantly contribute towards
adoption both from a purely technical and economic perspective, but also increase the adoption in
terms of ease of acceptance and usage. However, we believe this should be sought in a public private
cooperation.

This option would enable a market competition to take effect and where we would hope to see a
pattern similar to what has been seen in the payment industry.

The authoritative source for onboarding an identity would be a member state.
The entities onboarding would be highly regulated and/or supervised public and private entities.
The form factor of the identity would be highly standardized to ensure portability in the same way
passports have always been and identity cards are becoming based on the EU wide standardization
of national ID cards mandating adherence to the ICAO standards.
Acceptance would at least follow the patterns we see from passports and payment cards where
offline validation will be predominant and optional online verification can be accomplished
subsequently at the issuer. Ideally verifications are done online in realtime with offline capabilities
(f.ex. via mobile phones or NFC cards or similar)

We see the merits of enforcing acceptance and mandatory notification of national schemes but
question if such measures will not be seen as to prescriptive and would raise questions about big
brother and privacy and remove the focus from the inherent value propositions offered.

Again, we see very little rationale for option 3 unless option 2 and 1 is implemented as precursors.

In terms of impact we do not see a major contribution from Option 3 on itself. The major benefit of
Option 3 would be to enhance the uniformity and harmonization in the area thus probably giving a
higher adoption even without a prescription on acceptance.

The combination of this increase in adoption and the benefits brought by Option 1 and 2 will only
together give a much needed enhancement and push towards digital sovereignty.

Final observations

Conclusions

The current eIDAS regulation update will significantly impact EU and national digital developments,
related investments and digital environment role within EU and Member States during upcoming
years. Therefore, eIDAS regulation update should incorporate the major aspects from all options and
if necessary, updated with the reasonable new options proposed during the current consultations.
In terms of enabling a deep single digital market the addition of attributes and defining cross border
data sets is crucial for enabling digital verification at the European level and to avoid the member
states turning into digital islands. This is fully inline with the recommendation in the CEPS report but
will require a deployment of solutions to happen at scale in the MS where standardisation and
harmonisation are key enablers.

This would be instrumental in promoting the same goals as the single digital gateway and the only
once principle also for the private sector.

Recommendations

Our recommendation is to implement all three proposed options in a coordinated approach, f.ex. first
the harmonized attribute definitions, then the trusted service provider determination, followed by the
respective liability framework and lastly by the necessary RTS. Such approach will allow to prepare
for the subsequent option components implementation be implemented in a more efficient and
effective way, collect as much as possible feedback from the market and MS and could reuse the
latest technology developments in that field.
