Bundesdruckerei GmbH would like to contribute to the successful creation of a
future-proof legal framework to support an EU-wide, trustworthy and secure system
for identities and trust services in the digital space. Accordingly, with reference to
the three "policy options" set out in the EU Commission's roadmap, we propose that
the following three points be taken into account:

1) Hardware security modules as a technical basis for EU-wide secure
digital applications
The eIDAS Regulation should be further developed to create a usable, secure and
interoperable digital identity for public and private online interactions in the
European Union. Revisions aimed at improving the coherence, consistency and
interoperability of the existing eIDAS framework, for example through guidelines
on liability principles to promote the use of eIDs in the private sector, should be
pursued in accordance with this (see Policy Option 1). The Regulation should also
be amended to simplify the notification procedures for Member States. In
addition, Bundesdruckerei suggests establishing common rules for the use of
hardware security modules (either in the form of Universal Integrated Circuit
Cards (eUICCs), also known as eSIM, or embedded secure elements, also known
as eSEs). Modern smartphones are equipped with these modules, which are
perfectly suited to support digital applications, e. g. for digital identities in a
secure and trustworthy way. The aim should be to establish a union-wide
technical minimum standard for hardware security modules that harmonizes
basic security mechanisms while giving Member States discretion with the
implementation of country-specific solutions. Therefore, Bundesdruckerei
urgently recommends to standardize the access of eSE and eSIM and to oblige
Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs), respectively the Mobile Network
Operators (MNOs) to open their hardware security modules for third parties. This
uniform standard would be a big step for digital sovereignty within the European
digital single market demonstrating the security and trustworthiness of mobile
ID solutions, while helping to make the topic more transparent and
comprehensible for citizens and service providers alike. In this context, the
OPTIMOS 2.0 project initiated by the German Federal Ministry for Economic
Affairs and Energy is a promising approach that could be used throughout the
EU, as it creates the basis for reliable, unambiguous identification and
authentication in the digital world while complying with the highest security and
data protection standards. It also creates - irrespective of the future shape of
EU-wide digital identity management - the preconditions for further digital
applications.

2) Strengthening and expanding national eID usage

Bundesdruckerei welcomes the broadest possible use of national eIDs. The
extension of national eIDs to the private sector should thus be pursued as fast
as possible (see Policy Option 2). More private use cases in a wide range of
services can generally strengthen the use of national eIDs. In this context, the
use of national eIDs can be further promoted through incentives that encourage
a wider voluntary acceptance of national eIDs by companies. Mandatory use in
some areas could also be envisaged. In this regard, the Payment Services
Directive 2 is a strong example of how the tools from the eIDAS Regulation can
be effectively integrated into legislation. A pan-European interoperable approach
on the basis of OPTIMOS 2.0 could also create a new market for European
sovereign and trusted mobile applications, ranging from government documents
and credentials to private sector applications such as high-priced tickets or
access and vehicle keys.

3) Strengthening the state design of national eIDs

The eIDAS Regulation provides for mutual recognition of notified identification
instruments existing in the Member States and thus already provides for a common
European eID ecosystem by creating interoperability between national systems (see
Policy Option 3). The additional introduction of a European eID (with its extremely
high legal and technical complexity) would probably slow down the ongoing process
of the eIDAS Regulation and would not address the lack of use cases.
Bundesdruckerei therefore recommends that the concrete design of the national eID
systems should continue to be left exclusively to the Member States which must
assume liability for the authenticity of an identity and validate the national eID.

Conclusion

The combination of Options 1 and 2 offers the opportunity to make the best of the
EU standards already developed by CEN and ETSI in Mandate 460 binding by means
of Implementing Acts and to significantly improve the integration between eIDAS
eID services under Part II and the trust services under Part III. The Member States’
uptake of the optimised eIDAS Regulation should then be made mandatory for
special sectors, for example social and tax services.

The window of opportunity for saving European digital sovereignty is very small and
a practical implementation of the "better eIDAS" to enable the digital single market
and seamless public services should be completed in 2021.
