1&1 welcomes the opportunity to respond to the Commission’s consultation on the revision of
the eIDAS Regulation | European Digital Identity (EUid).

WEB.DE, GMX and 1&1 have been the first European companies for electronic delivery
Services certified by TÜViT and the German Federal Network Agency (Bundesnetzagentur)
under the eIDAS Regulation. WEB.DE, GMX and 1&1 have managed to successfully
implement qualified trust services, taking into account European standards and national
legislation. 1&1 is also a founding member of netID1.

We fully support EU-wide standards introduced by the eIDAS Regulation for unique
identification and digital signatures of electronic cross-border data transmissions. The
introduction of EU-wide standards for a clear identification has contributed significantly to
create the basis for Europe-wide, legally valid electronic communications and secure
electronic identification.

However there is also a need for improvement, especially as the potential of electronic
identification and authentication under eIDAS remains underexploited:

I. MEASURES SHOULD BE TAKEN PARTICULARLY WITH REGARD TO
 WIDENING THE SCOPE: We agree with the Commission's assessment that the uptake
of these eID means is limited and the potential is not being fully exploited. In particular
the restriction to the public sector restricts the scope for a daily use. A European
online ID can only work when encouraging wider use. Since no European country can
achieve this scope on its own, a successful European identity system can only be fit
for the future if it becomes practical and thus a game changer through daily use. We
therefore support the view expressed by the Commission that a single trusted
European ID that can be used both for public and private digital services, could boost
the digitalization of the Single Market and provide a convenient single-sign-on
possibility. In this context it should be noted that technical interoperability is the
prerequisite for a European-wide success. It is therefore particularly important not to
commit to unilateral technical solutions in advance (e.g. SAML or blockchain), but
rather to ensure technical interoperability. Therefore, and in order to leverage digital
identities across the EU Single Market, we highly recommend the Commission to
endorse the OpenID Connect Standard besides SAML.

1 netID is a European login standard provided by the European netID Foundation. It was founded by ProSiebenSat1 Media SE, the Media Group
RTL Germany and United Internet with its brands 1&1, WEB.DE and GMX. NetID aims to establish a European alternative to US login providers
with netID as a Single Sign-on (SSO). netID enables users to organise their data and consents provided to use internet services (opt-ins)
transparently and in compliance with data protection regulations in a so-called Privacy Centre (https://netid.de/)

MANDATORY INTRODUCTION OF EIDAS AS A SINGLE-SIGN-ON (SSO): The eIDAS
Regulation should set the course and ensure that citizens can participate in the
European digital market with a European digital identity rather than having to use
non-European IDs as offered e.g. by large US platforms | GAFAs (used as an
acronym for dominant platforms with significant network effects acting as
gatekeepers). Therefore the eIDAS Regulation must support the mandatory
introduction of a European Single Sign-on (SSO) regime as an alternative to the US
platforms. In our opinion the success of eIDAS depends on the user-friendliness and
a broad coverage. This leads to two main benefits: on the one hand, authentication by
an eIDAS certified service would ensure a high level of protection of personal data
and minimise (abusive) use of personal data by providers outside the EU. On the
other hand, an EU-wide internal market solution would support the availability and
further development of services based on an increasing demand. eIDAS, set up as
described above, could therefore help to adapt the market situation and weaken the
market power of market-controlling services. In order to ensure that the European ID
system prevails and becomes relevant to the user, it is necessary to expand its daily
use by including possible applications for identification and/or authentication at all
levels of trust. In other words, in order to promote the use of new trust services, use
cases that do not require verified identities must also be supported and offered. The
presence of a verified identity (substantial or high) shall not be a prerequisite for the
user’s access to this trust service.

PROMOTE HARMONISATION | MANDATORY INTEROPERABILITY: To ensure wide
reach, existing SSO standards which are already in conformity with eIDAS should be
included. The eIDAS regulation should define and complement standards to ensure
interoperability in consideration of different levels of security. A co-existence of
different (even national) standards (e.g. de-mail vs. e-mail vs. Bea vs. service portals)
would reduce the acceptance and use of trust services thus the use of trust services
in Europe. Although the regulation correctly identifies cross-border interoperability
and recognition of qualified certificates as a prerequisite for cross-border recognition
of qualified electronic signatures and specifies the requirements that must be met in
terms of data transport or electronic signature, it currently does not specify the access
requirements for participants to exchange data between two eIDAS services. In
practice, this leads to different market conditions within the EU Member States. This
interpretability leads to different requirements and the application of different
standards of conformity (e.g. substantial vs. high), leading to market entry barriers for
trusted service providers and additional barriers for products within the EU Member
States

II. ASSESMENT OF OBJECTIVES AND POLICY OPTIONS

BASELINE SCENARIO: This option is not suitable to exploit the potential of
electronic identification and authentication under eIDAS. This option should therefore
be excluded.

OPTION 1 (reinforced baseline scenario): We evaluated this option as insufficient.
Instead, we support additional incentives to accelerate the supply of eID schemes.
However, additional implementing acts and guidelines do not give enough attention of
a common binding and future-proof framework. In particular this applies to the private
sector, where guidelines will probably not prevent the existence of stand-alone
solutions.

OPTION 2: The extension of the eIDAS framework to the private sector and an
extension of the catalogue of trust services would be useful to ensure that the
European ID system prevails and that they become relevant to the user. For this it is
necessary to extend the daily use by providing a scope for identification and/or
authentication at all levels of trust, as well as mandatory use in all services that offer
users login with one or more of the services of GAFAs. Here, an open and federal
system for all providers (provider model) could play a key role in making different
account providers available under one brand and standard. Bringing together
European private and public suppliers under a single, open standard with a single
logo (example an EC card, that can be used all over Europe) would help to overcome
the “rivalry” of different private and public providers, as each system would be
certified and connected in accordance with the overarching standard. Thus users
would have the freedom to choose providers.

OPTION 3: This option in conjunction with option 2 would be the most
appropriate to address the problems of the current eIDAS regime identified by the
Commission in the impact assessment. The introduction of a complementary
European Digital Identity scheme (EUid) would contribute to establish a system that is
relevant to all European users.
