The feedback provided in this report exclusively aims to
support the industry’s market growth
promote adoption and effectiveness of trust services through usability
boost interoperability among different countries
promote innovation
assure quality and security to the users

The content of this document is the result of the author’s experiences, matured on 10+
years in the field of Digital Identity management and Electronic Trust Services

General considerations

Digital Transformation is profoundly changing everybody’s daily life, both on the
working than business side, reinventing the way people communicate and interact with
others. EU Commission President Ursula von der Leyen stressed, in her political
guidelines, the need for Europe to lead the transition to a healthy planet and a new
digital world.

Moreover, the COVID-19 crisis has strengthened the importance of digital
transformation and its tools. Until a few months ago, they were still considered as “nice
to have” to significantly increase productivity, improve the customer experience, ensure
security and lower transaction costs. The COVID-19 pandemic has moved Digital
Transformation to the top of business agendas in 2020 and has proven essential at a time
when people have been largely unable to leave their homes and to travel. The technology
has played a key role in maintaining business continuity while reducing exposure to the
virus and adhering to the social distancing guidance put in place by public health
officials.

Digital Transformation was finally considered as necessary to assure business continuity
for companies and organizations of any kind and size.

In this economic and social scenario, digital identity (digID) has become the critical
enabler of digital transformation. The need to establish individual identities uniquely,
accurately, quickly and securely is not limited to individuals but extends to legal entities
(both in public rather than in private sector), machines and devices.

In the same way, interoperability is clearly crucial far Europe that planned to have a
digital single market but recently had to fight against lockdown.

Regulation 910/2014 (eIDAS) represented a fundamental step in the promotion of a
digital single market, digitalization is happening at different speeds in EU countries.
This could be a risk in the next few years, creating entrenchment among the EU
countries with “the facto” several digital islands instead of a unique market.

Options outlined in the Inception Impact Assessment are not mutually exclusive and
should be combined in order to achieve a satisfactory outcome - for example a gradual
adoption seems the most reasonable choice implementing the options in different
stages.

Regarding Option 1, the recommendation is to create specific guidelines on
identification including fully remote processes. Furthermore, it is evident that
technology neutrality is desirable and possible in theory, but in practice it constitutes a
real obstacle in a cross-border usage of digital identity. To effectively boost
interoperability, maybe could be helpful to reduce the emphasis on technology
neutrality in favour of more uniformity and alignment in implementations, especially if
such uniformity is based on recognized international standards and specifications that
can be adopted by the stakeholders with a reasonable effort and can also be audited and
verified by Conformity Assessment Bodies (CAB).

According to the writer, Option 2 consists of a legislative intervention as ambitious than
powerful. The introduction of new trust services for identification, authentication and
for the provision of attributes, credentials and attestations and allowing the provision of
identification for devices constitutes in my vision the right path in the construction of a
common “playground” with the same rules, guarantees and security for every EU citizen.
This introduction could benefit from the trending technologies that are arising recently,
for example the usage of biometric recognition. Of course, the contribution of the
private sector would be fundamental also in the regulatory phase, so it would be strongly
recommended that the EU Commission organizes and leads technical workshops in
which private specialists would be engaged in the definition of the new trust services
and related standards. Once defined the new services, the provisions of the General Data
Protection Regulation should be still respected.

Option 3 represents an interesting reinforcement of Digital Identity usage. A fully
harmonized and common eID framework covering the EU would be a radical change
from the actual situation, characterized by several different identity schemes, toward a
unique common standard. On the other hand, this option hides several tricks and
dangers, such as the direct competition with the private sector that the introduction of
the European Digital Identity scheme (EUid) would create, a situation that is unlikely
to yield better solutions and services for the citizens and more generically the users. By
the way, it makes sense to postpone Option 3 after the proper implementation of Option
1 and 2.

Conclusions

The lesson learnt from Covid-19 pandemic is that Digital Transformation is crucial and
has become necessary to guarantee the business continuity of companies and
organizations of any kind and size.

In this scenario, Digital Identity plays the role of the enabler, due to the need to establish
individual identities uniquely, accurately, quickly and securely to perform whatever
digital transaction.

To lay the foundations for Digital Transformation, the update of Regulation 910/2014 is
a necessary step, that on the other hand will constitute a significant impact for Member
States, EU citizens, stakeholders and service providers.

To truly create a Digital Single Market, the introduction of new trust services for
identification, authentication and for the provision of attributes, credentials and
attestations become the best solution to promote the cross-border usage of eID, limiting
the growing risk that every Member State adopt a national based authentication scheme
turning to a “digital island”. To properly implement this, would be necessary the
organization by the EU Commission of technical workshops, to collect as much as
possible feedback from the market and from the involved stakeholders. In this way,
experts from the different Member states and belonging to different sectors and
stakeholders (public institutions, private companies and service providers, research
institutions, conformity assessment bodies, universities, etc.) could create new norms
and standards to define an harmonized and cross-border framework for these “new
services”.

In my opinion, the right strategy could be the sequential implementation of the options
included in the inception impact assessment, considering the three options as three
different phases of a single program with the same goal: enhancing digital identity usage
in an interoperable and cross-border way.

Each Option constitutes a more significant challenge, so should be implemented after a
deep analysis (object of specific workshops) of the precursor to provide a first important
feedback. The implementation of Option 3 is surely the most complicated, so it should
be defined only after a successful implementation of Options 1 and 2.
