With regard to the commitment of the European Commission to revise the eIDAS regulation (910/2014) and the current “roadmap
consultation”, the Royal Dutch Association of Civil-law Notaries (KNB) would like to inform you about its concerns and recommendations.

Just like the European Commission we also believe that sufficient choices for citizens for an identity service provider established within the
EU will give the citizens more sovereignty to decide to which third party they would disclose personal data or not. A clear separation
between the collection of personal identity data and the collection of other data for commercial exploitation would reduce the possibilities of
online platforms to make use of personal data for profiling of citizens or to obtain a monopoly in a certain area.

According to us an enormous need exists for a strong eID for EU citizens with an extension of eIDAS level ‘high’, issued by an independent
organization like public authorities or notaries. The extension should consist of en vivo face to face identification, biometric aspects and
additional safeguards to prevent fraud and to protect the EU citizen as much as possible. We are willing to discuss the possibilities and our
ideas for this eID with eIDAS level “High Extended” with you.

Regarding your intentions to launch an European Digital Identity scheme (EUid) we would like to emphasize that it is important that besides
public eID’s also private suppliers are allowed to offer eID services to public and private online service providers. In general, private
companies are able to offer innovative and cost-effective eID solutions. The development of eID’s should at least partly be left to the
market. We assume that also private providers will have the opportunity to become certified and registered in accordance with the EUid
scheme and this will not become only a public eID.

It is furthermore important that the schemes to obtain a registration as trusted service provider are equal throughout the EU to prevent
unfair competition. For example currently compliance of eID’s with the eIDAS requirements differs between member states, which might
cause unfair competition.

Whichever option mentioned in the Inception Impact Assessment is chosen, it is important to realize that several public and private eID
providers are already developing and investing for years now. For this reason the (technical) requirements for eID suppliers with eIDAS
levels “substantial” and “high” should not change significantly to prevent additional costs or investments for eID providers and discouraging
in stead of encouraging the development of eID products.

Another important concern is the lack of a system for acknowledgement of advanced electronic signatures. Advanced electronic signatures
are frequently used in business, real estate and business to consumer relations. However in contrary to qualified electronic signatures there
is no ‘EU Trusted List of Trust Service Providers’ for advanced electronic signatures. For companies and citizens it is almost impossible to
determine whether such a digital signature is reliable or not. We advise to develop an acknowledgement system comparable with the EU
Trusted List for qualified electronic signatures.

At last we would like to mention that the KNB is involved in the development of an eID with eIDAS level “high” called ‘NotaryID’ for the
notaries in the Netherlands, which will be used for access to digital systems of notaries and KNB and for signing of digital notarial deeds
(qualified electronic signatures). This eID will only be issued after en vivo face to face identification at a notary office. In the future this eID
might become available for digital identification outside the notarial environment.
