Introduction
EPIF welcomes the opportunity to comment on the Commission’s Inception Impact Assessment on the Revision of
the eIDAS Regulation aimed at improving its effectiveness, extend its application to the private sector and promote
trusted digital identities for all Europeans.

EPIF welcomes the Commission’s position that universally accepted public electronic identity (eID) is necessary for
consumers and businesses to have access to their data and securely use the products and services they want
without having to use unrelated platforms to do so and unnecessarily sharing personal data with them and agrees
that European digital identity that allows for a simple, trusted, secure and accessible to all public system for citizens
and businesses to identify themselves and share identity related information in the digital space can be designed
efficiently only at EU level.

Despite the eIDAS framework, the national rules on provision of digital identity services remain fragmented in or
undeveloped across the EU. It is important that the EU sets the right regulatory framework to make sure that the
Single Market is fit for the digital age and fosters the development of digital players.

EPIF is fully supportive of having Pan-European e-identification mechanisms that are secure, reliable, user-friendly
and interoperable and welcome the work of the Commission on this area.

EPIF’s preferred policy option would be to introduce a European Digital Identity scheme (EUid) complementary with
eIDAS. We would also support option three, to extend the scope of eID regulation under eIDAS to the private sector.

We are moving into a digital world where digital identity is becoming an essential requirement. Digital identity (ID)
technologies are evolving rapidly, giving rise to a variety of digital ID systems. It is key that these systems are
interoperable across Members States to make sure that we allow innovation and digital payments to grow in a
secure manner. A harmonised e-ID system would significantly reduce the cost of compliance for digital businesses
and would offer new opportunities for companies to meet their compliance obligations.

EPIF does not see additional risks associated with the use of electronic identity. On the contrary, we believe this
brings many opportunities. It will enable the raise of new services, improve security against fraud, help financial
institutions better manage client risk through information sharing such as through the cross-border unique identifier
noted below, allow connectivity among digital services and contribute to the economy as a whole.

A Digital ID and strong authentication can provide security of data and more explicitly assign ownership of the data
to consumers. It would also promote the development of open finance and cut the costs of KYC by simplifying
processes and reducing duplication.

The developments surrounding digital identity verification are one of the most promising uses of RegTech in recent
years. Online verification procedures and KYC are far more convenient for users than traditional methods; without
compromising security.

The lack of a harmonized, EU-wide, secure and reliable, digital identity framework also poses a significant barrier
to the development of FinTech solutions, particularly those solutions which can be used across national borders.

A harmonised EU wide online (i.e. non-face-to -face) KYC framework would facilitate the introduction of a truly
cross-border financial services market, and markedly reduce the cost of compliance for digital businesses.

This would significantly reduce the compliance costs for payment institutions involved in electronic payments,
including one-off payments. It is crucial to ensure technological neutrality due to speed of technology progress and
FinTech developments. It would reduce the inherent bias towards non-face-to-face payments. It would help reduce
fraud and increase the commercial incentives for industry to develop and invest in more efficient technologies to
deal with e-ID. All this would facilitate cross-border trade and the Single Market.

Regarding the list of attributes, we believe that technology should be able to be replicated from country to country
and it should be scalable. We also support the idea of unique identifier that would be attached to the identified
persons across border. This would facilitate the KYC process. We are also in favour of replication of Nordics
countries model where the Banks allow third party to access their data in order to simplify the KYC process. We
would also like point out the fact that physical verification’s option should be maintained to allow certain types of
clients to access financial services, i.e. migrants, unbanked population. The framework should, however, incentivize
and support the transfer to digital alternatives over the medium to long term.

With regard to the recognition of behavioural analysis as a (component of) Digital ID, we would like to point out that,
to a large extent, most firms have already taken a multi-factored approach to identification, authentication and
verification of customers in non face-to-face transactions within their own ecosystems. Companies are employing
elements of behavioural analysis to assign customer risk ratings, augment their understanding of the customer’s
identity, such as expected log-in channels, geolocation, frequency of usage, type of usage, IP addresses and
biometric markers. After all, Digital Identity, at its very core, is not about what the customer knows or is willing to
share, but rather, what the customer “is” in the absence of physical evidence.

EPIF would like to point out to the efficiency of Digital ID across all AML/CFT measures. Reliance on Digital ID
systems is in effect, reliance on a multi-factored approach to identification, authentication and verification of
customers in non face-to-face transactions through independent and reliable sources. As such then, the records
obtained for Digital ID verification may overlap with the types of records relied up for ongoing due diligence and
transaction monitoring today. The data can be useful across a range of AML/CFT measures and not be considered
in silos.

Finally, EPIF believes that a risk based approach is the most efficient method to manage AML/CFT. The level of
CDD required should be linked to the risk rating assigned to the customer. Since these risk ratings consider the
products used by the customer and are consistently assessed based on the customer’s behavior, the information
collected and verified as part of a customer’s Digital ID should also be done using this risk-based approach. Under
this approach, the quantity of customer information collected and verified would be aligned to the risk rating assigned
to the customer and thus allow FIs to consistently and constantly assess the user and mitigate any risk.
