The Developers Alliance welcomes the opportunity to provide feedback on the
European Commission’s planned revision of the eIDAS Regulation.

Developers Alliance​ advocates on behalf of software developers and the companies
invested in their success, to support the industry’s continued growth and promote
innovation.

1.

We support the importance of trusted digital identities in the private sector.
Trusted identities are a key enabler of the digital economy where developers
are active, and where interactions often occur between parties without
established relationships. The ability to build systems that replace physical
seals and signatures with digital equivalents is fundamental to bringing legal
relationships online.

2.

We also support the use of trusted digital identities in the public sector.
Relationships between governments and citizens often encompass highly
confidential or personal issues (taxation, benefits, healthcare, etc.) and trusted
digital identities are a key enabler of security and privacy in these contexts.

3.

The market for trusted digital identities is already well established. Through
existing relationships with governments, financial institutions, communications
providers, and online ecosystem providers, EU citizens have a robust
foundation for secure digital economy services. Any proposed revisions to
existing law must take care not to disrupt what’s working naturally.

4.

As the Internet of things grows in importance, the extension of trusted digital
identities to encompass agents, sensors and actuators will increase. Trusted
identities will likely play a role in future cybersecurity and authentication
systems for AI and IoT. Any proposed revisions must take into account the
dynamic and evolving nature of the digital economy and the infrastructure it
rides on.

5.

The current limitations of eIDAS systems, including their fragmented nature
and lack of consistency and ubiquity, have limited their utility. Since the launch
of the eIDAS Regulation, market forces in the private sector have evolved to
provide many of the benefits envisioned by the previous rules. These private
sector trusted digital identity ecosystems have become widely used and
provide very sophisticated protection for digital economy participants. They
continue to evolve and improve driven by market competition.

6.

We believe that the private sector is fully capable of developing sophisticated
digital identity services, benefiting from the continuous innovation that a
competitive marketplace promotes. We do not believe that a single, public
sector replacement is either required, or desirable. Where a common or
compatible system with universal application is beneficial, we are confident
that the market will coalesce on this solution (as has happened in credit card
payment and other systems in the past).

7.

We agree that the status quo is no longer valuable, having been overtaken by
private sector innovation and implementation. Re-investing in this scheme is
unlikely to drive consumers away from private sector alternatives. As such, we
are not generally in favor of Option 1 under the proposed Revision alternatives.

8.

While we support the potential benefit of extending eIDAS support to the
private sector digital identity market (Option 2), we remain wary of regulations
which could restrict the tremendous innovation taking place. Any intervention
in this area must avoid diluting the commercial potential that attaches to these
services - otherwise investment will stop and consumers will be harmed.
Defining in advance the restrictions that would attach to this Option has the
potential to make it unpalatable to potential private sector partners. A better
regulatory solution would be to engage the private sector BEFORE placing
pre-conditions on the hypothetical solution (a basic tenet of good regulatory
practice).

9.

Respecting consumer preference, including choice in authentication is a key
consideration for online businesses. The control of personal data is already
guaranteed by the GDPR, and any relevant additional rules should be carefully
assessed against it. We agree that certain authentication options which are
disconnected from a verified physical identity makes fraud (such as identity
theft) and cybersecurity threats more difficult to mitigate. Private service
providers, including online platforms, could integrate with the public eID
systems in order to confirm their users' legal identity.

10.

Extending the eIDAS service to directly compete with existing private sector
alternatives (Option 3) is likely to fail. While a common framework for public
and private sector services would be extremely valuable, displacing a thriving
and increasingly sophisticated and effective market with a bureaucratic system
is unlikely to yield a better product.
