Finance Denmark welcomes the initiative to revise the 2014 eIDAS Regulation, extending it to the private sector and promoting trusted
identities, in general, across Europe.

In Denmark, we have had a well-functioning public/private digital ID solution since 2010 called NemID. It is a public private partnership
collaboration between the Danish banks and the public sector. It is used extensively, by more than 90 % of the population between 16 and
90 years, both for public and private services, including electronic banking solutions and in a vast number of other financial e-services that
requires the security of an eID solution. Public services are almost all digitized, physical mail close to non-existing, and electronic banking is
used by nine out of ten bank customers.

The NemID solution will be replaced by a new solution in 2021 called MitID, which again is a public/private partnership collaboration
between the Danish banks and the public sector. The Danish Banks have therefore made large investments in both the current and next
digital ID solutions.

The Danish financial sector has realized the benefit of working together with public institutions to ensure solutions which would be
widespread in the Danish public, and therefore been a key player in reducing cost and advancing the digitization of society as a whole.

Within banking, there is a 40 year plus history of building solutions together in areas which are not competitive, e.g. the Danish Central
Securities Depository, VP Securities, and three data centres servicing smaller and mid-sized banks. In the public/private space, other
advanced solutions are the Digital Land Registry and e-Skat, a solution giving financial institutions insight in a citizens’ tax information
based on individual authorizations.

Based on the domestic experience, Finance Denmark sees great opportunities for an extension of the eIDAS framework based on
interoperability of secure domestic solutions. While the Danish NemID solution (and the coming solution MitID) are national schemes, they
are built in collaboration with the public sector and are also subject to the eIDAS regulation. The Danish government has notified NemID
with the Commission in accordance with eIDAS to ensure that the solution is recognized in other member states. This will also be the case
for the coming solution (MitID).

We have noted that DG FISMA is also looking into the possibility of establishing a digital (financial) ID scheme to be used across the EU.
Therefore, we encourage the Commission to ensure that the two initiatives are coordinated to avoid duplication of work and/or have
possibly conflicting requirements.
