France's 15,000 notaries and their staff use qualified e-identity and e-signature services 
on a daily basis, making the French notary's office one of the leading users of these 
technologies nationwide. French notaries are among the leading users of these technologies 
at national level. Thus, the Conseil supérieur du notariat is concerned by the revision of the 
e-IDAS regulation and would like to be heard by the European Commission's services during their 
preparatory services during their preparatory work.

The document entitled "Inception Impact Assessment - Revision of the eIDAS Regulation ≠ European 
Digital Identity (EUid)" proposes three options.

Option 1 seems to us to be unambitious in view of the issues at stake at the moment and option 3 
particularly cumbersome to implement when it is the deployment of these technologies. In order to 
be able to draw up authentic instruments remotely by videoconferencing, French notaries need to 
rely on e-identity tools deployed on a very large scale. Furthermore, for reasons of administrative 
coherence and the proper functioning of the Member States, it seems to us essential to leave the 
function of issuing authorities the function of issuing identity documents, whether they are digital 
or on physical media.

Option 2 attracts all our attention. It seems important to us that e-identity tools can be more easily 
complemented by attributes of quality. attributes. The attributes should not be directly attached to 
the e-identity tool but made available on national servers.
For example, for a natural person with several qualities: citizen, notary, mayor, president of a 
non-profit association, etc., the attributes of the e-identity tool should be made available on national 
servers. the attributes stored on a national server could allow to act and be recognised as such on 
different online services, depending on the activities performed. online services, depending on the 
activities carried out, without having to have several e-identity tools.

The management of quality attributes by national authorities seems to us to be both the right level of 
proximity to the user and the right level of interaction at national level. the right level of interaction 
at European level. It would be their role to technically qualify natural persons AND to determine who 
has the right to read the attributes. Thus, for example, a possible quality attribute indicating that 
a person is under protection regime could only be read by a restricted list of actors: courts, notaries, banks, etc.

The European Commission should also propose measures to enhance the standardisation of quality certificates
in order to make it easier to qualify in different countries. The European Commission should also propose 
measures to strengthen the standardisation of quality certificates in order to make it easier to qualify 
in the different Member States and to read the certificates.

Finally, it seems important to us that the European Commission stimulates the market of trust service 
provision tools so that there is Finally, we believe it is important that the European Commission 
stimulates the market for trust service delivery tools so that there is more creativity in Europe 
but also more competition between the players.
