From our reaction you will learn that we are enthusiastic about a more ambitious agenda for the eIDAS
framework. As one of Europe’s cultural and market pillars, the City of Amsterdam is actively engaging in
projects to enhance full participation of its citizens and visitors in our modern digital city.

From its conception, the city of Amsterdam has been home to people from all trades and all corners of the
planet, resulting in an open, free, culturally diverse and creative city. Now that we have clearly entered and
experienced the full impact of the digital revolution, we seek to uphold the very same values that made our
city so attractive and flourishing to begin with.

We strongly believe in a people centered approach to technology. As part of our strategic alliance with
Cities for Digital Rights, our Deputy Mayor Touria Meliani developed an ambitious policy framework “The
Digital City”, based on principles that are known to enhance trust like: privacy by design, data minimization
and the use of open source code by default. As one of the pilot cities, we have been active participant of
the DECODE project. The City of Amsterdam also embraces four main principles providing guidance to
citizens and entrepreneurs about the values and norms of the digital infrastructure. These four principles
has been widely adopted in other Dutch cities through the Association of Netherlands Municipalities.

Digital Identity and the eIDAS Regulation

A key concept in The Digital City is an easy to use, safe and reliable Digital Identity. Especially in this
challenging episode due to restriction of public services on physical locations to our citizens, we need to
provide people with an easy way to authenticate themselves in the digital realm. There is a clear and
present need for an easy to use, reliable and safe authentication mechanism for public and commercial
services, preventing further eroding of people’s trust. This seems to be in line with a more ambitious eIDAS
regulation, providing citizens in Europe with a shared electronic trust framework for their eID’s.

In cooperation with other municipalities and in cooperation with initiatives from the not for profit sector
and universities, the City of Amsterdam is actively pushing for a Digital Identity for all of its citizens based
on the Digital Identity engine IRMA. This engine allows for citizens to have a personal decentralized wallet
with verified personal data to be used as attributes, credentials and attestations for the kind of datafriendly customized authentication that fits the provisions of the GDPR.

We like to point the European Commission to our positive experiences with decentralized, zero knowledge
proof eID engines – providing a transparent way to separate personal data and transactions while at the
same time enhancing privacy by design and data-minimization. Based on ongoing experiments and roll out
of services we see a potential for these kind of eID’s as part of an extended eIDAS framework.

Based on our positive experience with IRMA we can share with the European Commission our insights in
ways to more strongly accommodate such technologies. We have seen the shift towards a more attributebased approach in the current revision, but we have not seen such a clear shift towards decentralized
architectures, where the storage of attributes is under the direct (physical) control of users, and is not
under control of intermediate parties (who can then monitor who authenticates where, with which
attributes). In short, we believe the eIDAS approach would benefit from privacy by design via decentralized
electronic identities.

If the European Commission has an interest to learn more about our experiences and the public services
we are building with these modern eID’s, we are very happy to provide for a follow-up call, a
demonstration or more in depth documentation.
