The eIDAS Regulation is a key asset for European actors as it has created a unique legal certainty
regarding trusted services and the VDSIC has built its trust model for the Digital Visible Seal Scheme on
the eIDAS one. Our trust model has been also promoted to several countries around the world and
some of them has adopted it such as the Canada and Tunisia.

Regarding the consultation from the European Commission, our preferred option is Option 1:
supplementing the current eIDAS Regulation with an implementing acts and technical guidelines.

There should be a clear focus on the exploiting of all the current possibilities already offered by the
current eIDAS Regulation.

The recent Regulation (EU) 2019/1157 — strengthening the security of identity cards and of residence
documents issued to EU citizens and their family members exercising their right of free movement has
also a key role in helping the Sovereign eID to become the root of trust of the European Digital Identity.

The Digital Identity should be considering as a critical infrastructure and the notification process at
European level shall remain a prerogative of the Member States.

The use of a Digital Visible Seal on notified Sovereign eID can help to fully harmonize the “seed” for
opening eID cards in NFC mode using a smart phone. This “seed” can be read by any smart phone using
a standard camera. As this “seed” is protected in terms of authenticity and as most of the eID cards
are certified according to the Common Criteria scheme (SOGIS MRA and EU CyberAct CC scheme) the
LOA High can easily be achieved.

To complement our position on the Option 1, we call also the European Commission to call the
European Standard Organizations to complete the current set of standards that are referenced into
the eIDAS.

For our Association, the two other options proposed by the European Commission could trigger the
privatization of European Digital Identity and they would be in full conflict with its political message
on European Digital Sovereignty. The Sovereign eID notified in accordance with the eIDAS Regulation
is an essential asset and shall be protected and further developed.
