Currently, the LEI is already accepted as an optional attribute for legal entities’ data sets in transactions
between eIDAS nodes, i.e. interfaces between national eID infrastructures. The LEI can be used within
eIDAS-compliant digital certificates as the eIDAS Regulation includes a tag for digital identification tools
such as the LEI to be embedded within certificates and company electronic seals to support identity
validation and management. For example, GLEIF 2019 Annual Report showcased by ESMA for its
compliance with the European Single Electronic Format (ESEF) is digitally signed by GLEIF’s executive
officers with eIDAS compliant digital certificates including the LEI.

Given the Commission considers a more ambitious legislative intervention to the eIDAS Regulation,
GLEIF suggests that a more prescriptive direction from the Commission is necessary for untapping the
benefits for the end-user and the whole ecosystem. Making the use of the LEI as mandatory in legal
entities’ data sets in transactions between eIDAS nodes would further increase the interoperability of
the eIDAS framework, making cross-border electronic transactions more efficient and secure. As noted
in the consultation document, in a hyper-connected economy, digital identity (digID) is becoming a
critical enabler of digital transactions. But this is only true if the digital identity is set up structurally to
maximize interoperability across EU member state borders and ideally with non-EU countries. The
current mutual recognition of eIDs does not help different identifiers to recognize each other in digital
platforms. Given the regulation intends to extend its application to the private sector practices such as
online banking or online shopping, a global standard, as opposed to regional or local ones, for entity
identification can maximize the cross-border interoperability.

Regarding cybersecurity, the use of the LEI allows for a persistent and reliable identification code to be
present throughout successively issued digital certificates, thus enhancing trust in internet transactions
and providing reliable and trustworthy information on the ownership and authenticity of electronic
documents and, thereby transactions. Furthermore, the Global LEI System is overseen by regulators
from around the world (see LEI ROC members for further detail), including the European Commission,
resulting in a highly regulated ecosystem of legal entity identification management. Lastly, including the
LEI within digital certificates establishes a verified link with the physical identity of a company thereby
reducing cybersecurity threats.

Furthermore ,incorporating the LEI within digital certificates enables users to achieve the tasks of
identity verification, authentication, and authorization as well as content processing in a digital
environment. By digitally signing the GLEIF Annual Report 2019, GLEIF demonstrates how to incorporate
this additional best practice step, beyond compliance with ESEF, to enable end user trust in the
authenticity and integrity of the Annual Report and end-to-end machine processing of the document.
Specifically, any recipient of the GLEIF Annual Report can first parse the certificate and tie that
certificate to the filing, in order to confirm the company filing is indeed authorized by a legal
representative of the company. Additionally, the recipient then can process the entire financial report in
a fully automated fashion to understand the financial position of the legal entity. Lastly, the recipient of
the report could aggregate internal information on financial transactions with the legal entity that are
tagged with the LEI and establish, again in a fully automated fashion, the entire risk profile of the
recipient with the legal entity.

GLEIF strongly recommends the European Commission to follow option 2 for the roadmap and to
consider harmonization of legal entity datasets as a priority. This would enable a stronger mandatory
usage of the LEI code in the digital certificates that need a trusted company identification such as
qualified (or advanced) business stamps, qualified (or advanced) legal representative certificates, and
SSL EV that identify companies. A prescriptive approach by the Commission would remove ambiguity
and bring further standardization in the application of eIDAS trust services in private sector solutions
such as KYC processes in banking and finance where trusted entity identification is needed.

The eIDAS framework, while established for the EU member states, has the potential to be adopted by
other nations as well. Using the LEI brings global interoperability for counterparties outside Europe
naturally. Therefore the advantages of having one global neutral organization ID, the LEI code, benefits
EU companies when identifying foreign companies and also works among other countries in the world.
This accelerates and bring robustness in the rapid digital trusted identification of companies.

GLEIF would like to provide an example where the option 2 approach could help to improve
interoperability across the EU Single Market:

The Revised Payment Services Directive PSD2 introduces a mix of approaches for identifying legal
persons. For example, it introduces a new identifier for Third Party Payment Service Providers (TPPs)
(the PSP identifier) – this is administered and maintained nationally by the National Competent
Authority (NCA). The PSP identifier must be embedded in the TPP's eIDAS/PSD2 Certificate to enable
authentication between TPPs and banks. So within one regulation the following results:

the eIDAS/PSD2 certificate is not usable for any other digital transaction within the EU or
beyond EU borders partly because it contains an identifier customized for the PSD2
implementation;

each NCA maintains a register with its own identifiers for banks, TPPs, and the NCA itself
thereby rendering it difficult to aggregate data within the PSD2 ecosystem;

the PSP ID identifier cannot be used to connect to other data sources, enable analysis, or
facilitate any other digital communications outside the PSD2 protocol.

What if the LEI were used instead? The eIDAS/PSD2 certificate could be parsed and, using the
publicly available LEI lookup API, banks could get a clearer picture of the TPP with which they are
engaging TPPs would not need to put in place another process for managing another organization
identifier. NCAs also could implement a less complex structure for recognizing TPPs. In total, all
parties gain in efficiency and the PSD2 framework is rendered more interoperable, thereby also
facilitating a more integrated EU payments market.

How could this be enabled via option 2? Per the scope of option 2, the eIDAS framework could be
extended to make the LEI mandatory.

Moreover, from an end user perspective, ‘once-only-principle’ should be essential. Given, there is a
strong support in the EU for making the LEI a necessary component for the creation of digital financial
identities, a clear mandate for the LEI can significantly reduce the complexity and cost – both people and
technology-related – associated with due diligence and validation of customers, partners and suppliers.
As the EU seeks to deepen its single market, its businesses – of all sizes, but particularly SMEs - would
benefit from having a single supra-EU entity identifier – connecting up the various national identifiers
that exist today.

Therefore, option 2, in which the LEI code becomes mandatory effectively would create the cross-border
interoperability both within and outside the EU.

Regarding option 3, DG CNECT may consider extending the vision to include persons acting on behalf of
organizations. The recently updated ISO 17442 standard for the LEI includes rules how the LEI and the
role of the person should be represented in public key certificates. This would enable company officers
to digitally take action on behalf of a firm, for example, signing contracts, submitting regulatory filings or
approving payments. As the consultation notes, the ability to identify conveniently and securely across
the internet for physical persons, companies and devices is a key condition for a seamless Single Market
and Single Digital Gateway. GLEIF suggests the eIDAS should be extended to include the link between
persons and companies and devices and companies.

As noted in the impact assessment, the Covid-19 pandemic has revealed shortcomings in digital trust
services. GLEIF believes the eIDAS review is an excellent opportunity to learn from these events and put
in place an adapted eIDAS framework that targets maximum interoperability across borders and
engagement with the private sector. A focus on legal entity data sets would help bring transparency to
sectors which are heavily impacted by Covid-19 restrictions and are pushing digitization. This includes
supply chain management, financial sector customer due diligence protocols, and distribution of
government stimuli. A clear requirement for the LEI would anchor the eIDAS framework to a global
standard that maximizes the benefits for EU legal entities in Single Digital Gateway and enables non-EU
country entities to participate in the extended framework.
