The European Commission is correct that the status quo is failing to provide all citizens access to an
eID accepted across the EU and the lack of a secure, interoperable eID solution limits digital
commerce. To address these shortcomings, the Commission should pursue elements of each policy
option discussed above. Specifically, it should develop more guidelines for eIDs offered by member
states to ensure quality, security, and interoperability. It should also revise the eIDAS regulation to
allow the private sector to use government-issued eIDs and introduce electronic trust services for
identifying devices. Finally, to provide a fallback option for any member states that fail to offer eIDs,
the Commission should establish an EUid available to any EU citizen. However, the Commission
should be careful not to overregulate private sector identity service providers who provide important
electronic trust services and can provide consumer-facing tools to help users leverage the value of a
government-issued eID. There is no need to set additional data protection rules for identity services
providers since they must already comply with the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). In
addition, the eIDAS framework and the EUid should complement existing private-sector digital
identity solutions by allowing private sector services to integrate with any government-issued eIDs.

Moreover, the Commission should not seek to exclude non-European service providers from offering
identity services to EU citizens.

Option 1 would expand access to eIDs from member states. Indeed, any resident of a member state
should have the right to quickly obtain an eID and this eID should be compatible across the EU.
Option 1 would also harmonize security standards and features for eIDs across the EU. The risk is
that the EU may not choose standards that facilitate interoperability with existing private sector
solutions. To address this concern, private sector stakeholders, including existing identity providers,
should have a role in developing standards. 

Option 2 would extend the scope of eIDAS to the private sector, thereby allowing private sector
companies to use eIDs to authenticate individuals to commercial services. This is a welcome
direction, as it would likely increase the use of eIDs across the EU and enhance security and privacy
for individuals. This option would also expand the eIDAS regulation to create new “trust services,”
such as identifying and authenticating devices. These types of identity services will be important with
the growth of the Internet of Things, and the Commission should establish an interoperable
framework for digital identities of electronic devices.

However, the Commission should not revise or expand data protection regulations for identity service
providers. These service providers are already subject to the GDPR, and creating additional
regulations would likely only discourage potential services providers from entering the market. In
particular, the Commission should not discourage identity providers from sharing personal
information about users with their consent. Many Internet users have accounts with social media
platforms that they can use to authenticate their identity to other online services, such as to shop
online. In many cases, consumers will want to share data from their digital identity providers for their
own convenience and security.

Option 3 would establish a common eID that any EU citizen could use voluntarily. Given that many EU
member states do not provide an interoperable national eID, providing an EUid would be a major
asset to growing the EU digital economy. However, the European Commission should not use the
development of an EUid to exclude foreign private sector identity service providers from the EU
market or require the private sector to accept the EUid if they prefer to use an alternative. Instead,
an EUid should complement private sector solutions that allow individuals to authenticate securely to
online services. Many consumers use authentication services from companies like Google, Amazon,
Microsoft, and Facebook, which allows them to securely manage their personal information and use
convenient features like single sign-on. In addition, some startups have created “personal data
wallets” to give consumers a variety of tools to manage their data and digital identity and choose
how to share their personal data with others.

Unfortunately, the roadmap appears to oppose continued use of these types of commercial services,
many of which consumers can access for free. The roadmap says, “Solutions of major social
platforms offer convenience, which comes at the cost of losing control over disclosed personal data.”
On the contrary, some social media platforms have made major investments in giving users granular
control over their information and how they share it with others. If the Commission’s goal is to
expand use of trusted identity solutions, it should work in partnership with the providers which many
EU citizens already use and which third-party services have already integrated with. For example,
private sector identity service providers could integrate with a government-issued eID to allow
individuals to verify details of their legal identity.

The current eIDAS regulations are insufficient and the Commission is right to pursue substantial
reforms to address the shortcomings. Providing individuals a legal identity is an inherent
responsibility of government, and this responsibility should extend to the digital economy. The private
sector can support these efforts, but it cannot solve this problem alone. Better standardization
across EU member states would lead to greater adoption by the private sector. But the Commission
should not seek to impose a public sector eID requirement that would limit EU citizens from using
private sector digital identity solutions as this would reduce consumer choice and access to many
secure, convenient, and easy-to-use services.
