Strengthening digital identity solutions with the GDPR

In a context of increasing dematerialisation of administrative procedures and the multiplication of 
online services, the notion of identity is undergoing profound changes as digital identity emerges, 
the notion of identity is undergoing profound changes as digital identity emerges. The control of 
identities by the user and the security of these identities are essential for the protection of 
personal privacy and the development of trusted digital trusted digital services.

THE INTEREST OF DIGITAL IDENTITY
For the same person, there may be several identities depending on the context (civil status, 
social and professional life, services online games, etc.) and the level of trust associated with them.

A digital identity can be based on different media: it can be a telephone, a smart card or servers 
when it is totally dematerialised. when it is completely dematerialised. In many countries, and soon 
in France, the State provides a national digital identity card which In many countries, and soon in 
France, the State provides a national digital identity card which makes it possible to extend to the 
digital world the possibility of proving elements of one's civil status in the physical world.

THE MAIN PRINCIPLES OF THE CNIL REGARDING DIGITAL IDENTITY 

The implementation of a digital identity solution necessarily involves the processing of personal data. 
Therefore, the RGPD is applicable. Given the development of digital identity solutions, here are the 
main points of vigilance in terms of protection, being reminded that these devices must most often 
be subject to a data protection impact analysis before their deployment. impact analysis (DIA) 
before they are deployed, given the stakes for individuals.

The plurality of digital identities

As digital identity is multiple and contextual, it is important to allow individuals to have 
several digital identities. Thus, an individual should be able to use different digital identities in 
different contexts (e.g. a so-called "regal" digital identity, which is used to identify a person's 
identity). identity, linked to civil status and guaranteed by the State, for registering on electoral 
lists and a digital identity linked to a pseudonym chosen by the individual. a pseudonym chosen by 
the user for a social network).

The proportionality of the digital identity solution and the importance of pseudonyms

Identification and authentication should be graduated according to the trust needed for each 
online service. Indeed, it is not It is not necessary to secure all digital identity use cases 
and it may be simpler for organisations, more user-friendly for users, and more secure for users. 
It may be simpler for organisations, more ergonomic for users and more protective in terms of personal
data processing to adapt the level of security required to the risks associated with the use of digital 
identity. risks associated with the use of a digital identity.

In practice, the compulsory use of a strong governmental identity (i.e. the identity guaranteed by 
the State at the highest level of insurance) could be limited to of assurance) could be limited to a 
small number of cases, while declarative solutions and the use of a pseudonym could be solutions and 
the use of a pseudonym could be favoured when there is no particular need for reliability, without 
abandoning the imperative of ensuring that the use of all these identities.

Data minimisation 

One of the key principles of the RGPD is the principle of data minimisation. It implies ensuring that 
only "adequate" data is processed, relevant and limited to what is necessary for the purposes for 
which it is processed".

Consequently, when a digital identity is used to access a service, only the information strictly 
necessary for the processing envisaged by the service should be provided.  service should be 
communicated to it. In practice, this means creating or using solutions that give necessary attributes, 
for example only a pseudonym or only the first name and year of birth, depending on the nature of the 
service used. nature of the service used. New technical solutions that integrate privacy by design not 
only provide access to only the necessary attributes, but also allow certain questions to be answered 
with only the strictly necessary information (e.g. answering the question "is the person a minor" with 
a yes or no rather than sending all the attributes of their civil status).

It is also a question of limiting the information collected by the identity provider. For example, it 
is possible to implement decentralised decentralised solutions, which do not allow the identity provider 
to know which service a person has connected to.

In addition, it is advisable to favour solutions that integrate privacy protection from the outset and 
by default.

Paying attention to the information provided to individuals

Digital identity processing can have a significant impact on the daily life of individuals. In this context, 
particular attention should be paid to In this context, particular attention should be paid to informing 
data subjects about the processing of their data, whether at the time of enrolment or at the time of 
sharing certain identity attributes.

The special case of the use of biometrics

In some cases, biometrics can be used to confirm the link between a civil status or "regal" identity 
and an individual. It can be used at the time of creation of the digital identity, or at the time of 
its use. It is also used in some countries to compensate for the lack of properly constituted civil registers.

While the use of biometrics to verify a person's identity or to authenticate him or her to an online service 
may seem legitimate, this type of processing is special because it makes it possible to verify a person's 
identity or to authenticate him or her to an online service.  This type of processing is special because 
it involves sensitive data that benefit from a reinforced level of protection. Indeed, the data processed 
is consubstantial with the person concerned and cannot be replaced in the event of usurpation or compromise 
(an individual can change his password but cannot change his fingerprints). Special attention should therefore 
be paid to the conditions of lawfulness of such processing (Art. 9 of the RGPD). In general, storage on 
individual media or in a way that allows the individual to control over their data are more protective 
for individuals than devices based on a central database of biometric data.  biometric data.

REGALIAN DIGITAL IDENTITIES

Regalian digital identities have been subject for several years to the European regulation n¼910/2014 of 
23 July 2014, known as eIDAS. This regulation This regulation aims to increase confidence in electronic 
transactions and the interoperability of identity systems within the market. To this end, it establishes a 
common basis for secure electronic interactions between citizens, businesses and public authorities across 
Europe. public authorities across Europe.

In particular, the Regulation sets out requirements for the mutual recognition of electronic means of 
identification for exchanges between public sector bodies and users at European level. It defines three 
levels of solutions (low, substantial and high) depending on the level of identity verification, thus 
allowing for a spectrum ranging from a cursory pre-verification to an in-depth verification and and may 
involve various means of authentication (from passwords to smart cards).

A "low" level may be sufficient to register for swimming lessons on the town hall's website, while a high 
level may be required for registering the birth of a child. It is good practice to use the lowest level that 
guarantees a sufficient level of confidence for a given service.

FranceConnect

Today, eIDAS digital identity solutions are implemented through France Connect, which serves as a bridge 
between identity providers (taxes, the Post Office, Ameli, Alicem, etc.) and many e-government services 
(town halls, driving licence renewal, etc.) or private services with a regulatory need to verify identity 
attributes.

While it should be borne in mind that the inaccessibility of FranceConnect would have a significant impact 
on access to many public services, this architecture has three main advantages:
1 - Identity providers are not aware of the services used by the identity holder.
2 - France Connect can make service providers aware of the importance of identifying the attributes that 
are strictly necessary and sufficient for their service, and only transferring them to the service provider, 
their service, and transfer only these to them.
3 - France Connect does not require the implementation of a population register dedicated to digital identity 
management, even if France Connect performs a verification with the national register of identification of 
natural persons.
It should be noted that FranceConnect centralises the technical traces of connection, and that the user can 
consult these traces and check whether illegitimate access has taken place. illegitimate accesses have taken place.

The first high-level identity provider in France: Alicem

Alicem is a mobile application that allows adults with a biometric passport or residence permit to create a 
digital identity to access online services such as health insurance, CAF, the "impots.gouv.fr" website, etc.
Initially, the Alicem digital identity can only be used through FranceConnect. This is the first digital identity 
solution developed by the State that aims to achieve the high level of security required by the eIDAS regulation. 
An experimental phase has been launched in 2019.

In response to a request for an opinion, the CNIL advised the government not to make the use of facial recognition 
for enrolment. The CNIL even suggested using alternative solutions to facial recognition to verify the person's identity:
Face-to-face verification of identity: visit to the prefecture, town hall, or a public service that receives the public.
Manual verification of the video and photograph on the document: the video is sent to the ANTS servers and verified by an agent.
Live video call with an ANTS agent.

2021: the year of the digital national identity card?

In application of the European regulation on strengthening the security of EU citizens' identity cards adopted 
in June 2019, the government is planning a French digital identity card for 2021.
This card would be both a 'classic' identity card and the medium for a strong digital identity carried by the State.

While technologies have made great strides in recent years, including the development of more protective systems 
for personal data, France could be at the forefront of the development of new technologies. France could be at 
the forefront of privacy-friendly digital identity by choosing a solution that limits what each entity participating 
in its use obtains as personal data to what is strictly necessary. each entity participating in its use 
obtains information, whether it be at the creation or use of such an identity.

The CNIL will have to be consulted on the draft texts that will govern the future system. At this stage, 
several elements could be taken into account be taken into account:

Certain decentralised architectures make it possible to avoid systematic interaction with the identity provider 
when using the service.
As with most uses of identity cards in the physical world, only the service provider and the user are able to 
know that the identity is being used at a given time for a given service. In addition, when a higher level of 
identification is required, or all uses of the X uses of the identity, a check that the identity has not been 
revoked can be implemented.

These solutions could integrate, by design, the use of different identifiers, for example to allow the use of 
multiple sectoral identifiers for the public sector. sectoral identifiers for the public sector.
In order to respect the principle of data minimisation, the chosen solution could allow the service provider 
to indicate which attributes it needs and ensure that it is able attributes it needs and ensure that only these 
are transmitted to it.
The chosen solution could incorporate proof-of-knowledge technologies that allow, for example, to obtain only 
proof of majority of the person. 
