1. RESOCOM's vision of digital identity

RESOCOM's business is risk analysis following an expert assessment of physical or dematerialised ID media.
Today, digital identity does not consist of a civil status identity but of a multitude of digital identifiers, including an identity linked to the e-reputation integrating all the personal or professional elements present on the web where the level of trust remains to be proven. The COVID has enabled us to observe the urgent need for a unique and secure digital identity and an increase in frauds and scams from the Internet. The consultation launched by the European Commission is an opportunity for RESOCOM to the opportunity for RESOCOM to present its main mission: to anticipate in real time the behaviours and the quality of the supporting documents of a file in return for financial financial commitments or various rights.
Our secure web platform automates the analysis of a standardised or partially standardised digital support, delivers a certificate of compliance or non-compliance, and this since 1999, in real time, with statistics on the typology and geolocation of suspicious documents and suspicious behaviour. This gives us a certain legitimacy on a high level of expertise on European European identity media.

The new digital uses create a large number of facilities for all European citizens. These facilities entail risks of usurpation of European citizens' identities just as the free movement in the Schengen area has weakened the the lack of knowledge of the identity documents of each member country. Each year, within the RESO-CLUB association, RESOCOM publishes the statistics of the most ALERT and confirmed SUSPECTED European documents. The percentage is related to the expertise rate.
The more you check, the more you identify the risk, RESOCOM applications allow you to identify the avoided risk. The sums are sufficiently eloquent for our The sums speak for themselves, so that our clients, mainly banks, are satisfied and are committed to a partnership of trust.

2. RESOCOM is the trusted third party

As a pioneer and reference in the fight against identity and document fraud, with more than 8% of alerts per year, RESOCOM has become RESOCOM has become a leader in the field of behavioural expertise and analysis. Founded by Marie AZEVEDO in 1999 based on the observation that banks were opening accounts, issuing real means of payment, giving access to credit, including terrorist financing and money laundering risks. risks of money laundering. The action is situated at 3 levels of involvement according to the individual, the company and the communities. The challenge is therefore to respond to regulatory, reputational, financial, commercial and societal risks. This is why RESOCOM has naturally In line with the RGPD commitments, we participate in and share our approaches with other market players in order to improve the security of information. market players in order to improve the security of media and dubious behaviour. The security of European citizens' civil status data The security of European citizens' civil status data is a subject for public institutions and all private organisations that need to secure their business relationships. The control must be multi-layered in an intelligent public-private sharing. It is mainly the private sector that has largely It is mainly the private sector that has invested heavily in security, states can capitalise on these initiatives to make them more effective.

3. For a public/private partnership

RESOCOM is part of a public interest approach, the daily assistance provided to European citizens who are victims of identity theft is a reality and no one can be sure of the results. identity theft is a reality and no one is immune to this phenomenon which has become threatening due to multiple identifiers considered as digital identities and for the most part digital identities and in most cases provided and retrieved by the GAFA
