The concept of combining the three options makes a lot of sense, although it may require a longer migration period to move from the
current eIDAS to the next phase.

Option 1 includes identity verification for issuing qualified certificates. Identity verification should include remote identity verification
solutions. The international standards organization, Fast Identity Online (FIDO) Alliance is currently developing possession-based identity
verification and binding performance requirements along with certification assessment criteria for those requirements. Depending on the
timing, eIDAS could leverage FIDO’s work and include it in the updated eIDAS regulation. In addition, a recent trend is utilizing databases
maintained by member state governments to verify attributes voluntarily with auditable and recorded user consent. Attributes could include
such as name, address, driver license number, date of birth, and social security or health ID numbers.

Although facial recognition technology has been negatively reported on primarily when used in law enforcement and border control
applications. However, when used for online authentication into a web site or mobile application, facial recognition technology has been well
received by the general public for its balance of security and user experience benefits. Since they are distinct use cases for the technology,
the Commission should not omit facial recognition for authentication in the update.

Option 3’s European Digital Identity scheme (EUid) is a worthwhile endeavor. On the surface the initiative is similar to the Pan-Canadian
Trust Framework currently under development by the Digital Identity and Authentication Council of Canada (DIACC). If the EUid scheme
moves forward, we recommend that member states follow the Government of Canada’s lead and collaborate with vendors and relying
parties such as financial institutions, healthcare institutions, e-commerce companies, and naturally representatives from member states.
