First of all, we would like to acknowledge the extraordinary work already carried
out by the European Commission on the eIDAS Regulation and on the approach
and method chosen for its revision.

We agree with the diagnosis made in the "Inception Impact Assessment" on the
state of development of eIDs in Europe and the consequences that this situation
has on the development of a large common European digital market. The
disparities that exist between the different countries and the divergent national
strategies (opening up to service providers from the private sector or not, single
national identity provider or private identity providers, etc.) risk creating divides
that will be difficult to bridge. This is why we do not believe that the status quo
defined by the baseline scenario is feasible.

On reading the Inception Impact Assessment, we understand that the options
described are not mutually exclusive and that, on the contrary, they would in all
likelihood have to be combined in order to achieve a satisfactory result. Thus, it
seems difficult to consider option 2 without having implemented option 1, and
option 3 seems to require at least a good part of options 1 and 2.

Option 1:
This option seems to us to be the minimum change to be made. It reduces the
disparities regarding prior verification of identity, especially at a distance, and is
an important step.

Similarly, abandoning the doctrine of technological neutrality, if it leads to the
adoption of open and already recognized international standards and
specifications, will reduce the technical difficulties encountered today in
ensuring the interoperability of solutions.

It might then be possible to allow an Identity Provider evaluated in one Member
State and meeting the technical specifications of another Member State to
operate in the latter without having to go through a lengthy and costly
evaluation again.

Member States could also be encouraged or forced to open up their identity
schemes to private Identity Providers, which should foster innovation and user
experience once a business model is defined. The existence of a business model
for digital identity seems to us to be an indispensable element: if there is no
business model, digital identity will either be financed by taxes, which will not
encourage innovation, or at the mercy of players who will derive additional
benefit from becoming an identity provider. It therefore seems important to us
that Member States should be obliged to provide an economic model for their
identity scheme as soon as it is open to private service providers.

As a private identity provider in France, we are confronted not with the absence
of an economic model, since the service providers are prepared to pay, but with
a lack of market organization in a model where the National Scheme plays the
role of aggregator without assuming the consequences.

Option 2:
We consider this option to be highly desirable, as identification is often not
sufficient to access a service, for example a banking KYC. But we do not believe
it is necessary to go as far as defining new Trust Services. Indeed, if we take the
example of a banking KYC, the providers of the necessary attributes are already
identified (tax authority, utility bill, etc.) and adding an additional element in the
trust chain does not seem to us to facilitate integration.

Option 3:
We believe that the introduction of a "European Digital Identity scheme" would
be an extremely important way of strengthening the use and deployment of
electronic identity in Europe. A fully harmonised e-identity scheme covering
Europe would allow a transition from the current, very different systems to a
common standard which would significantly contribute to adoption, both from
a purely technical and economic point of view, but also increase adoption in
terms of ease of acceptance and use.

We believe that this is even the only desirable horizon as it avoids the
fragmentation of solutions which is a real danger for European players who will
not manage to reach a critical size in a market made up of national schemes with
special requirements.

Additional comment on digital residency :
eIDAS and GDPR are extraordinary tools that shape a European conception of
digital. In this sense they are both protectors and bearers of European values.
It seems important to us to be able to project them beyond European borders
and to allow non-EU citizens to be issued with a digital identity by a European
Identity Provider, to use European online services and to place themselves under
the European legal umbrella. Restrictions on residence or nationality that are
sometimes present (explicitly or implicitly) in certain national identity schemes
should therefore be banned.
