Executive summary
Yubico’s feedback to the eIDAS inception impact assessment document is summarized below.
As regards to Option 1, the reinforced baseline scenario, Yubico recommends the following
improvements of the eIDAS EU regulation 910/2014 ​[5]​ with respect to eID schemes:

The eIDAS regulation should specify well-defined rules for remote identity proofing
The eIDAS regulation should be harmonized with the eID scheme requirements in the EU
Cybersecurity Act, EU regulation 2019/881 ​[8]
The Commission Implementing Regulation EU 2015/1501 ​[6]​ should require credential
phishing resistance at Level of Assurance (LoA) High
A framework for re-using pre-approved eID products could simplify the approval and
notification processes of eID schemes
Backup eID schemes with simplified processes for distribution and remote identity proofing
could be allowed during emergency situations such as pandemics; such eID schemes may
therefore go beyond traditional X.509 PKI smart cards
LoA High should be mandatory for secure access to QTSPs with remote signing services in
order to cater for sole control of remote creation of Qualified Electronic Signatures

When it comes to Option 2, the extended scope of eID regulation under eIDAS to the private sector,
Yubico has the following comments:

In general, it would be beneficial to extend the scope of eID regulation under eIDAS to the
private sector; this would increase the use of eID schemes across the EU
Existing large scale identity providers, such as technology companies, identity providers,
banks and telecom providers with billions of users, could get their high-end authentication
solutions notified as eID schemes
The current eID approval process, which is based on national agencies’ approvals, would
have to be adopted for private identity providers, which may require new or
complementary procedures in addition to the national approval procedures
The architecture of national eIDAS-Nodes may have to be adjusted for private identity
providers; in particular OpenID Connect ​[11]​ may be allowed as an alternative to SAML v2
for eIDAS-Nodes
If banks in the EU would create approved eID schemes, they can be aligned with the PSD2
EU directive 2015/2366 ​[10]​ for meeting the requirements on Strong Customer
Authentication and Dynamic Linking for authentication of financial transactions

Finally, with respect to the European Digital Identity scheme (EUid) in Option 3, Yubico would like
to make the following comments:

A European Digital Identity scheme (EUid) is not preferred in our view
There are existing systems in various EU member states that may not be compatible with an
EUid
A pan-European EUid may be viewed as too regulated in various EU member states
Technical innovations, in particular in the private sector, could be suppressed or mitigated
by an EUid
Local support can be problematic with an EUid, with respect to physical identification,
helpdesk support in local languages, and distribution of eID tokens
Instead of an EUid, federated solutions could be considered instead; such federations will
allow for better international interoperability, higher scalability, and be based on modern
technology

Scope of this document
The scope of this document is Yubico’s feedback to the EU Commission’s inception impact
assessment ​[9] regarding the revision of the eIDAS regulation ​[5]​. In particular, the three different
options have been commented on.

Audience
This document is a public document. The intended audience is the responsible DG CNECT H4 team
and the eIDAS legislators in the EU Commission.

Comments on Option 1
General

Yubico proposes that the eIDAS regulation is improved as follows with respect to Option 1, which is
the reinforced baseline scenario.

Allow for remote identity proofing

The eIDAS regulation, implementing acts and technical ETSI/CEN standards should be clarified and
improved to allow for remote identification of individuals and organizations across the EU. Such
remote identification systems should in the best case scenario cater for identification according to
LoA High regarding eID schemes, and for QTSP certification authorities to issue Qualified
Certificates.

At the moment, there are specific EU member states that may grant selected QTSPs the possibility
to identify individuals remotely, but this should be harmonized for the rest of the EU in the eIDAS
regulation.

It is also important that a strong binding is established between the issued eID and the individual
during a remote identification process.

Remote identification of individuals has also proven to be relevant and useful during the COVID-19
epidemic. Furthermore, travelling costs and carbon dioxide emissions will be reduced if the
individuals can be identified remotely instead of travelling to physical identification meetings.

The potential eIDAS legislation for remote identification should also be streamlined with ETSI TC
ESI ​Specialist Task Force 588​ on Identity Proofing, which has two deliverables:

ETSI TR 119 460 Electronic Signature and Infrastructures (ESI); Survey of technologies and
regulatory requirements for identity proofing for trust service subjects, due December
2020.

ETSI TS 119 461 Electronic Signature and Infrastructures (ESI); Policy and security
requirements for trust service components providing identity proofing of trust service
subjects, due July 2021.

Harmonize eIDAS with the EU Cybersecurity Act

The EU Cybersecurity Act, regulation (EU) 2019/881 ​[8]​, defines requirements and processes for
Information and Communications Technology (ICT) products and services that are used for eID
schemes according to LoA Low, Substantial and High. The revised eIDAS regulation should be
harmonized with the EU Cybersecurity Act.

Require credential phishing resistance at LoA High

The Commission Implementing Regulation EU 2015/1501 ​[6]​ on the interoperability framework
should require credential phishing resistance at LoA High; solutions unable to provide that
protection should be relegated to LoA Substantial or Low.

Framework for pre-approved eID products

If a product has been approved for use with an eID scheme in one EU member state, it would be
beneficial with an eIDAS framework that could allow for the same product to be re-approved for
other eID schemes. That could simplify the approval processes for eID schemes, which in turn could
increase the rollout pace and adoption of eID schemes in the EU.

Backup eID schemes during emergency situations

During emergency situations, such as pandemics, the eIDAS regulation may allow for backup eID
schemes to be used as temporary alternatives to the default eID schemes. For example, in the USA
during the COVID-19 pandemic, the White House Office of Management and Budget (OMB) released
a ​directive​ that allows for alternative security solutions that are more appropriate for remote
identification and authentication during the lockdown.

Hence, it is important that backup eID schemes allow for remote identification proofing and for an
effective distribution model of eID devices. The temporary eID devices should be targeting an
efficient deployment of a solution for electronic identification, and may not be equipped with visual
photos and biometric information.

Require LoA High for access to QTSP

The Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2016/650 ​[7]​ does not refer to any standards for
signing devices operated by a trust service provider in a secure environment that could meet the
requirements in the eIDAS Regulation (EU) 910/2014 Annex II ​[5]​ for qualified signature or seal
creation devices.

Now, there are three CEN standards that define how to deploy a remote QSCD in conjunction with
SAM-modules at a QTSP for remote creation of qualified signatures:

CEN EN 419 221-5, Protection profiles for TSP Cryptographic modules - Part 5:
Cryptographic Module for Trust Services ​[1]

CEN EN 419 241-1, Trustworthy Systems Supporting Server Signing – Part 1: General
System Security Requirements ​[2]

CEN EN 419 241-2, Trustworthy Systems Supporting Server Signing Part 2: Protection
Profile for QSCD for Server Signing ​[3]

The revised Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2016/650 should refer to these
CEN-standards in order to provide solutions for creating remote qualified signatures under sole
control.

Furthermore, ENISA has published a ​report​ that describes how the EU Commission Implementing
Decision 2016/650 ​[7]​ may be updated to reference the CEN standards above to regulate the
security and operations of a QSCD at a QTSP with the purpose of creating remote qualified
electronic signatures.

This feedback has previously been reported by Yubico to the EU Commission as part of the ​eIDAS
public consultation​ in October 2019.

Comments on Option 2

General

Yubico promotes the initiative to extend the scope of eID regulation under eIDAS to the private
sector, notably introducing new trust services for identification, authentication and for the
provision of attributes, credentials and attestations and allowing the provision of identification for
devices.

By allowing private eID schemes, large-scale identity providers, could certify their eID schemes to
be used by EU citizens and organizations. This would open up for billions of citizens to use their
existing credentials, certificates and electronic identities as approved eID schemes according to
eIDAS.

Potential private identity providers

Private companies that could be potential candidates for identity providers to operate
eIDAS-compliant eID schemes are for example: multinational technology companies (such as
Microsoft, Google, Facebook and Amazon), identity providers (such as OKTA, PING and Duo),
financial institutes, and telecom operators.

If such private companies were to create eIDAS-compliant eID schemes, the identification and
authentication requirements should preferably meet the LoA according to High in order for the eID
schemes to be fully notified on the EU level. If needed, separate tenants with specific identification
and authentication solutions may be deployed to increase the security level as required to meet LoA
High.

The private companies may take the legal responsibilities and liabilities for the eID schemes,
equivalent to the supervising agencies in the EU.

Adopt the eID approval process for private IdP:s

If private identity providers will be allowed to get their eID schemes notified by the EU, a different
approval process will be needed than the existing procedure with national eID schemes, which can
be notified on the EU level. Several private identity providers may however be operated
independently of the EU member states, so an agency such as ENISA on EU level may be needed for
approving private companies eID schemes. (In some cases, the private companies may still get their
eID schemes approved by the national agencies. )

Adopt the architecture of eIDAS-Nodes for private IdP:s

The concept of nationally operated eIDAS-Nodes may have to be revised if private identity
providers would get their eID schemes approved. Either the private identity providers may connect
to the national eIDAS-Nodes, or the identity providers may operate their own eIDAS-Nodes. The
latter alternative will be easier to deploy and maintain for private identity providers, since large
scale operators such as Microsoft, Google and Facebook already have federated Web-SSO protocol
such as OpenID Connect ​[11]​ deployed and distributed. See the next section for more information
on federated solutions based on OpenID Connect.

Allow OpenID Connect for private IdP:s

The Commission Implementing Regulation EU 2015/1501 ​[6]​ on the interoperability framework
refers to technical specifications with SAML v2 as the federation protocol used for interaction
between the eIDAS-Nodes. The scope could be broadened to include OpenID Connect ​[11]​, since
that is a modernized version of federation protocols, which is deployed at several private and
governmental systems. In particular, the European national governmental systems ​FranceConnect​,
CZ.NIC MojeID​, and ​GOV.UK Verify​ already rely upon OpenID Connect.

OpenID Connect solutions can also be deployed and used independently of eIDAS-Nodes, which
could allow for a more scalable federated system.

Alignment with PSD2

If banks in the EU would set up privately approved eID schemes, those authentication solutions
could be aligned with the Payment Services (PSD2) Directive (EU) 2015/2366 ​[10]​, in order to meet
the requirements on Strong Customer Authentication (SCA) and Dynamic Linking to authenticate a
financial transaction.

Comments on Option 3

General

Option 3, which would introduce a European Digital Identity scheme (EUid), is not preferred in our
view. Instead of an EUid, federated solutions could be considered instead; such federations will
allow for better international interoperability, higher scalability, and be based on modern
technology. The arguments for this standpoint are elaborated in the sub-sections below.

Existing systems in various EU member states

Several EU member states have already designed, approved and implemented national eID schemes
that have been approved by the relevant agency and been notified on EU level. The national eID
schemes are to a large extent designed for the member states’ identity providers and governmental
portals. In certain cases, the eID schemes are based on legacy authentication solutions that have
been in production for two decades. The technology, eID devices and protocols differ from member
state to member state. Replacing those authentication systems with a pan-European EUid will be a
very costly process for several EU member states.

Regulatory challenges

A pan-European EUid may be viewed as too regulated in various EU member states, which could
result in objections from member states that prefer local solutions.

Mitigation of technical innovations

Technical innovations, in particular in the private sector, could be mitigated by an EUid. The
competition on the authentication market in the EU may also be suppressed by an EUid. Therefore,
it is important to allow for private companies to invent, implement and deploy identity and
authentication solutions across the EU market.

Local support needed

Local support will always be needed for authentication solutions. This is relevant for the
identification process (which in many cases requires a physical meeting), helpdesk staff that speak
the local language, distribution of eID tokens, etc.

Rely upon federated solutions

As an alternative to meet the objectives in Option 3, federated authentication solutions based on
modern technology such as OpenID Connect ​[11]​ could be considered. Such federated solutions
could provide scalable and standardized ways for cross-border authentication and Web-SSO.
Furthermore, such EU federated solutions could be made interoperable with international
authentication infrastructures in countries such as Australia and Canada.

Glossary of terms

Abbreviations

CEN
EBSI
eID
eIDAS
EN
ENISA
ESI
ESSIF
ETSI
EU
EUid
FIDO
ICT

Committee European Normalization
European Blockchain Service Infrastructure
electronic IDentity
electronic IDentification Authentication and trust Services
European Norm
European Union Agency for Cybersecurity
Electronic Signature and Infrastructures
European Self-sovereign Identity Framework
European Telecommunications Standards Institute
European Union
European Digital Identity
Fast Identity Online
Information and Communications Technology

IdP
LoA
OMB
PSD2
QSCD
QTSP
SAM
SAML
SCA
SSO
TC
TR
TS

Identity Provider
Level of Assurance
Office of Management and Budget
Payment Services Directive
Qualified Signature Creation Device
Qualified Trust Service Provider
Signature Activation Module
Security Assertion Markup Language
Strong Customer Authentication
Single Sign On
Technical Committee
Technical Report
Technical Standard
