The eKYC and Identity Assurance Working Group (eKYC & IDA WG) of the OpenID
Foundation welcomes the proposal of the Commission to extend the scope of eIDAS trust
services by introducing a new trust service for identification, authentication and for the
provision of attributes, credentials and attestations and allowing the provision of identification
for devices (Option 2 in the EC Revision of the eIDAS Inception Impact Assessment). This
will allow companies operating identity solutions to contribute to securing digital transactions
across the EU.

The eKYC & IDA WG is a dedicated working group of the OpenID Foundation (the technical
standardisation body specifying OpenID Connect and accompanying extensions). The
OpenID Foundation delivers specifications for interfaces that enable interoperability between
implementations, and the eKYC and Identity Assurance Working Group is focusing on use
cases and extensions to OpenID Connect for communicating strong identity assurance
(https://openid.net/wg/ekyc-ida/).

Most commercial identity providers have built their solutions on OpenID Connect because of
its strong support for mobile platforms, ease of integration, formally proven security, and the
ability to have users explicitly consent. Billions of transactions are performed every day using
OpenID Connect. A significant number of identity providers, e.g. financial institutions or
telecommunications operators, are also able to assert digital identities on a level comparable
to eIDAS trust level substantial or high. A significant number of relying parties and their
developers are familiar with OpenID Connect as it is used for Open Banking as well as their
own use cases. In order to leverage the respective digital identities for the EU Single Market,
we recommend the commission to endorse OpenID Connect beside SAML (which was
already endorsed under Implementing Act 2015/1501) as a technical standard for eIDAS.

We would also like to mention that several Identity Providers provide access to government
issued identities via OpenID Connect and even eID systems use OpenID Connect, namely
itsme (Belgium), BankID (Norway, Sweden, & Finland), and France Connect (France). We
think this is a strong evidence that OpenID Connect could facilitate the implementation of all
options given in the inception impact assessment document.

We also know that most commercial identity providers provide a mixture of attributes
maintained according to different trust frameworks and at different trust levels (just think of
name vs eMail address) and even self asserted attributes for the same identity. Technical
standards utilised to implement the updated eIDAS regulation should consider and support
such use cases by providing a clear delineation between identity attributes verified and
maintained according to different trust frameworks as well as accompanying metadata about
sources, validation process, and trust level
(https://www.slideshare.net/TorstenLodderstedt/identity-assurance-with-openid-connect).

The commission might also want to consider use cases where the digital identity of EU
citizens is used beyond the boundaries of the EU. The eKYC working group focuses on an
international standard that is relevant to many jurisdictions with representatives from Japan,
Australia, UK, US, France, Czech, and Germany. In our experience, international use cases
increase the requirement for dedicated representation of the aforementioned metadata in
the technical standard for attribute provisioning in order to allow the relying party to process
identity data in a robust fashion.

Since the consultation paper mentions blockchain based identity solutions, we would like to
point out that technical diversity in implementations is of utmost importance for innovations.
However, adoption across member states and services requires technical interoperability.
That’s why there is also work under way to provide a bridge between blockchain based
identity solutions and relying parties via the mature and simple integration with OpenID
Connect standard.

As subject matter experts in digital identity, we are thrilled with the direction eIDAS is taking
and are more than happy to offer our advice in the course of targeted stakeholder interviews.
