                                  EUROPEAN
                                  COMMISSION

                                                                Brussels, 3.6.2021
                                                                COM(2021) 281 final
                                                                2021/0136 (COD)

                                                Proposal for a
    REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL
    amending Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 as regards establishing a framework for a

                                        European Digital Identity
           {SEC(2021) 228 final} - {SWD(2021) 124 final} - {SWD(2021) 125 final}

                    EXPLANATORY MEMORANDUM

    1.  CONTEXT OF THE PROPOSAL

    ·   Reasons for and objectives of the proposal

    This explanatory memorandum accompanies the proposal for a Regulation of the European

    Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 of the European

    Parliament and of the Council of 23 July 2014 on electronic identification and trust services
    for electronic transactions in the internal market (eIDAS)1. The legal instrument aims to

    provide, for cross-border use:

    ­   access to highly secure and trustworthy electronic identity solutions,

    ­   that public and private services can rely on trusted and secure digital identity

        solutions,

    ­   that natural and legal persons are empowered to use digital identity solutions,

    ­   that these solutions are linked to a variety of attributes and allow for the targeted

        sharing of identity data limited to the needs of the specific service requested,

    ­   acceptance of qualified trust services in the EU and equal conditions for their

        provision.

    What is emerging in the market is a new environment where the focus has shifted from the
    provision and use of rigid digital identities to the provision and reliance on specific attributes
    related to those identities. There is an increased demand for electronic identity solutions that
    can deliver these capabilities providing efficiency gains and a high level of trust across the
    EU, both in the private and the public sector, relying on the need to identify and authenticate
    users with a high level of assurance.

    The evaluation of the eIDAS Regulation2 revealed that the current Regulation falls short of
    addressing these new market demands, mostly due to its inherent limitations to the public
    sector, the limited possibilities and the complexity for online private providers to connect to
    the system, its insufficient availability of notified eID solutions in all Member States and its
    lack of flexibility to support a variety of use cases. Furthermore, identity solutions falling
    outside the scope of eIDAS, such as those offered by social media providers and financial
    institutions, raise privacy and data protection concerns. They cannot effectively respond to
    new market demands and lack the cross border outreach to address specific sectoral needs
    where identification is sensitive and requires a high degree of certainty.

    Since the entering into force of the eID part of the Regulation in September 2018, only 14
    Member States have notified at least one eID scheme. As a result, only 59 % of EU residents
    have access to trusted and secure eID schemes across borders. Only 7 schemes are entirely
    mobile, responding to current user expectations. As not all technical nodes to ensure the
    connection to the eIDAS interoperability framework are fully operational, cross-border access
    is limited; very few online public services accessible domestically can be reached cross-
    border via the eIDAS network.

    1   OJ L 257/73 of 28.8.2014

    2   [add reference once adopted]
    By offering a European Digital Identity framework based on the revision of the current one, at
    least 80% of citizens should be able to use a digital ID solution to access key public services
    by 2030. Furthermore, the security and control offered by the European Digital Identity
    framework should give citizens and residents full confidence that the European Digital
    Identity framework will offer everyone the means to control who has access to their digital
    twin and to which data exactly. This will also require a high level of security with respect to
    all aspects of digital identity provisioning, including the issuing of a European Digital Identity
    Wallet, and the infrastructure for the collection, storage and disclosure of digital identity data.

    Furthermore, the current eIDAS framework does not cover the provision of electronic
    attributes, such as medical certificates or professional qualifications, making it difficult to
    ensure pan-European legal recognition of such credentials in electronic form. In addition, the
    eIDAS Regulation does not allow users to limit the sharing of identity data to what is strictly
    necessary for the provision of a service.

    While the evaluation of the eIDAS Regulation shows that the framework for the provision of
    trust services has been rather successful, providing a high level of trust and ensuring the
    uptake and use of most trust services, more needs to be done to reach full harmonisation and
    acceptance. For qualified certificates of website authentication, citizens must be able to rely
    on them and benefit from the secure and trustworthy information about who is behind a web
    site, thus reducing fraud.

    In addition, to respond to the dynamics of the markets and to technological developments, this
    proposal expands the current eIDAS list of trust services with three new qualified trust
    services, namely the provision of electronic archiving services, electronic ledgers and the
    management of remote electronic signature and seal creation devices.

    This proposal also offers a harmonised approach to security, for citizens relying on a
    European digital identity representing them online, and for online service providers who will
    be able to fully rely on and accept digital identity solutions independently of where they have
    been issued. This proposal implies a shift for issuers of European digital identity solutions,
    providing a common technical architecture and reference framework and common standards
    to be developed in collaboration with the Member States. A harmonised approach is necessary
    to avoid that the development of new digital identity solutions in Member States create further
    fragmentation triggered by the use of divergent national solutions. A harmonised approach
    will also strengthen the Single Market as it would allow citizens, other residents and
    businesses to identify online in a secure, convenient and uniform way across the EU to access
    both public and private services. Users would be able to rely on an improved ecosystem for
    electronic identity and trust services recognised and accepted everywhere in the Union.

    In order to avoid fragmentation and barriers due to diverging standards, the Commission will
    adopt a Recommendation at the same time as this proposal. This Recommendation will setout
    a process to support a common approach allowing Member States and other relevant
    stakeholders from the public and private sectors, in close coordination with the Commission,
    to work towards the development of a Toolbox to avoid divergent approaches and avoid
    endangering the future implementation of the European Digital Identity framework.

    ·  Consistency with existing policy provisions in the policy area

    This proposal builds on the current eIDAS Regulation, on the role of Member States as
    providers of legal identities and on the framework for the provision of electronic trust services
    in the European Union. The proposal is complementary and fully coherent with other policy    instruments at EU level aiming to translate the benefits of the internal market in the digital
    world, particularly by increasing the possibilities for citizens to access services cross-border.
    In this respect, the proposal implements the political mandate provided by the European
    Council3 and the President of the European Commission 4to provide an EU-wide framework
    for public electronic identities which ensures that any citizen or residents can have access to a
    secure European e-identity, which can be used anywhere in the EU to identify and
    authenticate for access to services in the public and private sectors, allowing citizens to
    control what data is communicated and how it is used.

    ·   Consistency with other Union policies

    The proposal is consistent with the priorities for the digital transformation as set out in the
    strategy Shaping Europe's Digital Future5 and will support achieving the targets indicated in
    the Digital Decade Communication6. Any personal data processing under this Regulation

    should be carried out in full compliance with the General Data Protection Regulation (now
    onwards GDPR)7. In addition, this Regulation introduces specific data protection safeguards.

    To ensure a high level of security, the proposal is also consistent with Union policies related
    to cyber security8. The proposal has been designed to reduce fragmentation applying the

    general cyber security requirements to trust service providers regulated by the eIDAS

    Regulation.

    This proposal is furthermore coherent with other sectorial policies relying on the use of

    electronic identities, electronic attestations of attributes and other trust services. This includes
    the Single Digital Gateway Regulation9, requirements to be fulfilled in the financial sector

    related to anti money laundering and counter terrorism financing, initiatives to share social

    security credentials, for a digital driving licence or for future digital travel documents and

    other initiatives set out to reduce administrative burden for citizens and businesses relying

    fully on the possibilities provided by the digital transformation of procedures both in the

    public and the private sector. The wallet will furthermore enable qualified electronic
    signatures that can facilitate political participation10.
    2.  LEGAL BASIS, SUBSIDIARITY AND PROPORTIONALITY

    ·   Legal basis

    This initiative aims to support the Union's transformation towards a Digital Single Market.
    With the growing digitisation of cross-border public and private services which rely on the
    use of digital identity solutions, there is a risk that within the current legal framework, citizens
    will continue to face obstacles and not be able to make full use of online services seamlessly
    throughout the EU and to preserve their privacy. There is also the risk that the shortcomings
    of the current legal framework for trust services would increase fragmentation and reduce
    trust if left to Member States alone. Thus, Article 114 TFEU is identified as the relevant legal
    basis for this initiative.

    ·   Subsidiarity (for non-exclusive competence)

    Citizens and businesses should be able to benefit from the availability of highly secure and
    trustworthy digital identity solutions that can be used across the EU and from the portability of
    electronic attestations of attributes linked to identity. Recent technological developments, market
    and user demand require the availability of more user friendly cross border solutions that allow
    access to online services EU­wide, which the eIDAS Regulation in its current form cannot offer.

    Users have also grown increasingly accustomed to globally available solutions, for example when
    accepting the use of Single Sign-On solutions provided by the larger social media platforms to
    access online services. Member States cannot alone address the challenges this creates in terms of
    market power of large providers, which requires interoperability and trusted eIDs at EU level. In
    addition, electronic attestations of attributes issued and accepted in one Member State, such as an
    electronic health certificate, are often not legally recognised and accepted in other Member States.
    This creates the risk that Member States continue to develop fragmented national solutions that
    cannot operate across borders.

    For the provision of Trust Services, although largely regulated and functioning in accordance with
    the current legal work, national practices also create the risk of increased fragmentation.

    EU-level intervention is ultimately best suited to provide citizens and businesses the means to
    identify cross-border and exchange personal identity attributes and credentials using highly secure
    and trustworthy digital identity solutions, in compliance with EU data protection rules. This
    requires trusted and secure eID and a regulatory framework linking them to attributes and
    credentials at EU level. Only EU-level intervention can lay down the harmonised conditions that
    ensure user control and access to cross border online digital services and an interoperability
    framework making it easy for online services to rely on the use of secure digital identity solutions,
    irrespective of where in the EU it has been issued or where a citizen resides. As largely reflected
    in the review of the eIDAS Regulation, it is unlikely that national intervention would be equally
    efficient and effective.

    ·   Proportionality

    This initiative is proportionate to the objectives sought, providing an appropriate instrument
    for setting the necessary interoperability structure for the creation of an EU Digital Identity
    ecosystem building on legal identities issued by Member States and on the provision of
    qualified and non-qualified digital identity attributes. It provides a clear contribution to the
    objective of improving the Digital Single Market through a more harmonised legal
    framework. The harmonised European digital Identity wallets to be issued by the Member
    States on the basis of common technical standards also provide a common EU approach
    benefitting users and parties relying on the availability of secure cross-border electronic
    identity solutions. This initiative addresses the limitations of the current electronic
    identification interoperability infrastructure based on mutual recognition of diverse national    electronic identification schemes. Taking into consideration the set objectives, this initiative is
    considered sufficiently proportionate and the costs likely to be commensurate to the potential
    benefits. The proposed Regulation will give rise to financial and administrative costs, which
    are to be borne by Member States as issuers of the European Digital Identity wallets, by trust
    services and online service providers. However, these costs would likely be outweighed by
    the significant potential benefits for citizens and users stemming directly from an increase in
    cross-border recognition and acceptance of electronic identity and attribute services.

    The costs derived from creating and aligning to the new standards for trust service providers
    and online service providers cannot be avoided if the objective of usability and accessibility is
    to be achieved. The initiative intends to harness and build on the investment already made by
    Member States in their national identity schemes. Furthermore, the additional costs generated
    by the proposal are designed to support harmonisation and justified on the expectation that, in
    the long run, they will reduce administrative burden and compliance costs. The costs linked to
    the acceptance in regulated sectors of digital identity authentication attributes can also be
    regarded as necessary and proportionate as far as they support the overall objective and
    provide the means by which regulated sectors can fulfil legal obligations to legally identify a
    user.

    ·   Choice of the instrument

    The choice of a regulation as the legal instrument is justified by the need to ensure uniform
    conditions in the Internal Market for the application of the European Digital Identity by
    means of a harmonised framework that aims to create seamless interoperability and provide
    European citizens and companies with public and private services across the Union with
    highly secure and trustworthy eIDs.

    3.  RESULTS OF EX-POST EVALUATIONS, STAKEHOLDER

        CONSULTATIONS AND IMPACT ASSESSMENTS

    ·   Ex-post evaluations/fitness checks of existing legislation

    An evaluation of the functioning of the eIDAS Regulation was conducted as part of the
    review process required by Article 49 of the eIDAS Regulation. The main findings of the
    evaluation with respect to electronic identity is that eIDAS has not achieved its potential.
    Only a limited number of eIDs have been notified, limiting the coverage of notified eID
    schemes to about 59% of EU population. In addition, the acceptance of notified eIDs both at
    the level of Member States and service providers is limited. It also appears that only a few of
    the services accessible through domestic eID are connected to the national eIDAS
    infrastructure. The evaluation study has also found that the current scope and focus of the
    eIDAS Regulation on eID schemes notified by EU Member States and on enabling access to
    online public services seems too limited and inadequate. The vast majority of the needs of
    electronic identity and remote authentication remain with the private sector, in particular in
    areas like banking, telecom and platform operators that are required by law to verify the
    identity of their customers. The added value of the eIDAS Regulation with regard to
    electronic identity is limited due to its low coverage, uptake and usage.

    The problems identified in this proposal are linked to the shortcoming of the current eIDAS
    framework and fundamental contextual changes regarding markets, societal and technological
    developments triggering new user's and market's needs.
    ·  Stakeholder consultations

    An open public consultation was launched on 24 July 2020 and closed on 02 October 2020. In
    total, the Commission received 318 contributions. The Commission also received 106 replies
    to a targeted stakeholder survey. Opinions have also been gathered from Member States in a
    variety of bilateral and multilateral meetings and surveys organised since early 2020. This
    notably includes a survey of Member State representatives of the eIDAS Cooperation
    Network in July-August 2020 and various dedicated workshops. The Commission also held
    in-depth interviews with industry representatives and met business stakeholders in various
    sectors (e.g. eCommerce, health, financial services, telecom operators, equipment
    manufacturers etc.) in bilateral meetings.

    A large majority of respondents to the open public consultation welcomed the creation of a
    single and universally accepted digital identity relying on the legal identities issued by
    Member States. Member States largely support the need to reinforce the current eIDAS
    Regulation providing citizens with the possibility to access both public and private services
    and recognise the need to establish a trust service allowing for the issuing and cross-border
    use of electronic attestations of attributes. Overall, Member States emphasized the need to
    build a European Digital Identity Framework on the experience and strength of the national
    solutions, seeking to find synergies and benefitting from investments made. Many
    stakeholders referred to how the COVID-19 pandemic had demonstrated the value of secure,
    remote identification for all to access public and private services. On trust services, most
    actors agree that the current framework has been a success, however, some additional
    measures were required to further harmonise certain practices related to remote identification
    and national supervision. Stakeholders with a largely national customer base expressed more
    doubts about the added value of a European Digital Identity framework.

    Digital identity wallets are perceived more and more by the public and private sector as the
    most appropriate instrument allowing users to choose when and with which private service
    provider to share various attributes, depending on the use case and the security needed for the
    respective transaction. Digital identities based on digital wallets stored securely on mobile
    devices were identified as a main asset for a future-proof solution. Both the private market
    (e.g. Apple, Google, Thales) and governments already move in this direction.

    ·  Collection and use of expertise

    The proposal is based on the information collected as part of the stakeholder consultation for
    the purpose of the impact assessment and evaluation reports of the eIDAS Regulation in view
    of the review obligations set out in Article 49 of the eIDAS Regulation. Numerous meetings
    have been organised with Member State representatives and experts.

    ·  Impact assessment

    An impact assessment was carried out for this proposal. On 19 March 2021, the Regulatory
    Scrutiny Board issued a negative opinion with some comments. Following a revised
    resubmission, on 5 May 2021, the Board delivered a positive opinion.

    The Commission examines different policy options to achieve the general objective of the
    present initiative, which is to ensure the proper functioning of the internal market, particularly
    in relation to the provision and use of highly secure and trustworthy electronic identity
    solutions.    The impact assessment examines the baseline scenario, policy options and their impacts for
    the three policy options considered. Each option presents a choice for political consideration
    based on the level of ambition. The first option presents a low level of ambition and a set of
    measures mainly aiming to strengthen the effectiveness and efficiency of the current eIDAS
    Regulation. By imposing mandatory notification of national eIDs and streamlining the
    existing instruments available to achieve mutual recognition, the first option is based on
    meeting the needs of citizens by relying on the availability of diverse national eID schemes
    that aim to become interoperable.

    The second option presents a medium ambition level and mainly aims to extend the
    possibilities for the secure exchange of data linked to identity, complementing government
    eIDs and supporting the current shift towards attribute based identity services. The aim of this
    option would have been to meet user demand and create a new qualified trust service for the
    provision of electronic attestations of attributes linked to trusted sources and enforceable
    cross-border. This would have extended the scope of the current eIDAS Regulation and
    supported as many use cases as possible relying on the need to verify identity attributes linked
    to a person with a high level of assurance.

    The third and preferred option presents the highest level of ambition and aims to regulate the
    provision of a highly secure personal digital identity wallet issued by Member States. The
    preferred option was considered to address in the most effective way the objectives of this
    initiative. To fully address the policy objectives, the preferred option builds on most measures
    assessed under option one (reliance on legal identities attested to by Member States and the
    availability of mutually recognised eID means) and option two (electronic attestations of
    attributes legally recognised cross border).

    With regards to the general framework for Trust Services, the level of ambition calls for a set
    of measures not requiring a step-wise approach in order to meet the policy objectives.

    The new qualified trust service for the management of remote electronic signature and seal
    creation devices would bring considerable security, uniformity, legal certainty and consumer
    choice benefits both linked to the certification of the qualified signature creation devices and
    in relation to the requirements to be fulfilled by the qualified trust service providers managing
    such devices. The new provisions would reinforce the overall regulatory and supervision
    framework for trust service provision.

    The impacts of the policy options on different categories of stakeholders are explained in
    details in Annex 3 of the Impact Assessment supporting this initiative. The assessment is both
    quantitative and qualitative. The Impact assessment study indicates that the minimum
    quantifiable costs can be estimated at 3.2+ billion, since some of the cost items cannot be
    quantified. Total quantifiable benefits have been estimated to  3.9 billion ­ 9.6 billion. With
    regards to the wider economic impacts, the preferred option is expected to have a positive
    impact on innovation, international trade and competitiveness, contribute to economic growth
    and lead to additional investment in digital identity solutions. For example an additional  500
    million investment triggered by the legislative changes under option 3 is expected to generate
    benefits of  1,268 million after 10 years (at 67% adoption).

    The preferred option is also expected to generate a positive impact on employment,
    generating between 5,000 and 27,000 additional jobs over the 5 years following the
    implementation. This is explained by the additional investment and the reduced costs for
    businesses relying on the use of eID solutions.    The positive environmental impact is expected to be greatest for the third option, which is
    expected to improve to the maximum extent the take up and usability of eID, bringing
    positive impacts on the emissions reduction related to public service delivery.

    Electronic ledgers provide users with proof and an immutable audit trail for the sequencing of
    transactions and data records, safeguarding data integrity. While this trust service was not part
    of the impact assessment, it builds upon existing trust services as it combines time stamping
    of data and their sequencing with certainty about the data originator, which is similar to e-
    signing. This trust service is necessary to prevent fragmentation of the internal market, by
    defining a single pan-European framework that enables the cross-border recognition of trust
    services supporting the operation of qualified electronic ledgers. Data integrity, in turn, is
    very important for the pooling of data from decentralised sources, for self-sovereign identity
    solutions, for attributing ownership to digital assets, for recording business processes to audit
    compliance with sustainability criteria and for various use cases in capital markets.

    ·   Regulatory fitness and simplification

    This proposal lays down measures that will apply to public authorities, citizens and online
    service providers. It will reduce administrative and compliance cost for public administrations
    and operational costs and reduced expenditure related to security for online service providers.
    Citizens will benefit from savings from reduced administrative burden, relying fully on digital
    means to identify and the facility to securely exchange digital identity attributes with the same
    legal value cross border. Electronic identity providers will also benefit from savings in
    compliance costs.

    ·   Fundamental rights

    Since personal data falls within the scope of some elements of the Regulation, the measures
    are designed to fully comply with the data protection legislation. For example, the proposal
    improves options to share data and to enable discretional disclosure. Using the European
    Digital Identity Wallet, the user will be able to control the amount of data provided to relying
    parties and be informed about the attributes required for the provision of a specific service.
    Service providers shall inform Member States of their intention to rely on a European Digital
    Identity Wallet, which would allow Member States to control that sensitive data sets, for
    example, related to health are only requested by service providers in accordance with national
    law.

    4.  BUDGETARY IMPLICATIONS

    In order to optimally achieve the objectives of this initiative, it is necessary to finance a
    number of actions both at the Commission level, where the allocation of about 60 FTEs is
    envisaged in the period 2022-2027 and at Member State level through their active
    participation in the expert groups and committees linked with the work of the initiative and
    which are composed of the representatives of Member States. The total financial resources
    necessary for the implementation of the proposal in the 2022-2027 period will be up to EUR
    30.825 million, including EUR 8.825 million of administrative costs and up to EUR 22
    million in operational spending covered by the Digital Europe Programme (pending
    agreement). The financing will support costs linked to maintaining, developing, hosting,
    operating and supporting the eID and trust services' building blocks. It may also support
    grants for connecting services to the European Digital Identity Wallet ecosystem, the
    development of standards and technical specifications. Finally, financing will also support
    carrying out annual surveys and studies effectiveness and the efficiency of the regulation in    reaching its objectives. The "financial statement" linked to this initiative provides a detailed
    overview of the costs involved.

    5.  OTHER ELEMENTS

    ·   Implementation plans and monitoring, evaluation and reporting arrangements

    The impacts will be monitored and evaluated in accordance with the Better Regulation
    Guidelines covering the implementation and application of the proposed Regulation. The
    monitoring arrangement constitutes an important part of the proposal, in particular in view of
    the shortcomings of the current reporting framework, as shown by the evaluation study. In
    addition to the reporting requirements introduced in the proposed Regulation, which aim to
    ensure a better data and analysis base, the monitoring framework will monitor: 1) the extent to
    which the necessary changes have been implemented in line with the adopted measures; 2)
    whether the necessary changes to the relevant national systems have been implemented; 3)
    whether the necessary changes to the compliance obligations by the regulated entities have
    been adhered to. The European Commission (1, 2 and 3) and the National Competent
    Authorities (2 and 3) will be responsible for the data collection based on pre-defined
    indicators.

    On the application of the proposed instrument, the European Commission and the National
    Competent Authorities will assess through annual surveys: 1) the access to eID means for all
    EU citizens; 2) the increased cross-border recognition and acceptance of eID schemes; 3)
    measures to stimulate the adoption by the private sector and the development of new digital
    identity services.

    Contextual information will be gathered by the European Commission using annual surveys
    on: 1) the size of the market for digital identities; 2) public procurement expenditure linked to
    digital identity; 3) share of businesses providing their services online; 4) share of online
    transactions requiring strong customer identification; 5) share of EU citizens using online
    private and public services.

    ·   Detailed explanation of the specific provisions of the proposal

    The draft Regulation requires Member States in Article 6a to issue a European Digital Identity
    Wallet under a notified eID scheme to common technical standards following compulsory
    compliance assessment and voluntary certification within the European cybersecurity
    certification framework, as established by the Cybersecurity Act. It includes provisions to
    ensure that natural and legal persons shall have the possibility to securely request and obtain,
    store, combine and use person identification data and electronic attestations of attributes to
    authenticate online and offline and to allow access to goods and online public and private
    services under the user's control. This certification is without prejudice to the GDPR in the
    meaning that personal data processing operations relating to the European Digital Identity
    wallet can only be certified pursuant to Articles 42 and 43 GDPR.

    The proposal sets out in Article 6b specific provisions on the requirements applicable to
    relying parties for the prevention of fraud and to ensure the authentication of personal
    identification data and electronic attestations of attributes originating from the European
    Digital Identity Wallet.

    For the purpose of making more electronic identification means available for cross border use
    and improving the efficiency of the process of mutual recognition of notified electronic
    identification schemes, the notification of at least one electronic identification scheme by    Member States is made mandatory in Article 7. In addition, provisions to facilitate unique
    identification are added to ensure the unique and persistent identification of natural persons in
    Article 11a. This concerns cases where identification is required by law such as in the area of
    health, in the area of finance to discharge anti-money laundering obligations, or for judicial
    use. For this purpose, Member States will be required to include a unique and persistent
    identifier in the minimum set of person identification data. The possibility for Member States
    to rely on certification to ensure conformity with the Regulation and thereby replacing the
    process of peer review, improves the efficiency of mutual recognition.

    Section 3 presents new provisions on the cross-border reliance on the European Digital
    Identity Wallet to ensure that users can rely on the use of European Digital Identity Wallets to
    access online services provided by public sector bodies and by private service providers
    requiring the use of strong user authentication.

    In Chapter III on trust services, Article 14 on International aspects is amended to allow the
    Commission the possibility of adopting implementing decisions attesting the equivalence of
    the requirements applied to trust services established in third countries and of the services
    they provide, in addition to the use of mutual recognition agreements in accordance with
    Article 218 TFEU.

    Regarding the general provision applicable to trust services, including qualified trust service
    providers, Articles 17, 18, 20, 21 and 24 are amended to align with the rules applicable to
    Network and Information Security in the EU. When it comes to the methods to be used by
    qualified trust service providers to verify the identity of the natural or legal persons to whom
    the qualified certificates are issued, the provisions on the use of remote means of
    identification have been harmonised and clarified in order to ensure that the same rules are
    applied across the EU.

    Chapter III presents a new article 29a to define requirements for a qualified service for the
    management of remote electronic signature creation devices. The new qualified trust service
    would be directly linked and build on measures referenced and assessed in the impact
    assessment notably measures on the "Harmonisation of the certification process for remote
    electronic signing" and other measures calling for the harmonisation of supervision practices
    by Member States.

    In order to ensure that users can identify who is behind a website, Article 45 is amended to
    require providers of web browsers to facilitate the use of qualified certificates for website
    authentication.

    Chapter III presents three new sections.

    The new section 9 inserts provisions on the legal effects of electronic attestations of attributes,
    their use in defined sectors and the requirements for qualified attestations of attributes. In
    order to ensure a high level of trust, a provision on the verification of attributes against
    authentic sources is inserted in Article 45d. To make sure that users of the European Digital
    Identity Wallet can benefit from the availability of electronic attestations of attributes and
    have such attestations issued to the European Digital Identity Wallet, a requirement is inserted
    in Article 45e. Article 45f contains, instead, additional rules for the provision of electronic
    attestation of attribute services, including on the protection of personal data.

    The new section 10 allows for the provision of qualified electronic archiving services at the
    EU level. Article 45g on qualified electronic archiving services complements Articles 34 and
    40 on qualified preservation services for qualified electronic signatures and qualified
    electronic seals.    The new section 11 establishes a framework for trust services in regards to the creation and
    maintenance of electronic ledgers and qualified electronic ledgers. An electronic ledger
    combines time stamping of data and their sequencing with certainty about the data originator
    similar to e-signing with the additional benefit of enabling a more decentralized governance
    that is suitable for multi-party cooperation. This is important for various use-cases that can be
    built on electronic ledgers.

    Electronic ledgers help companies saving costs by making multiparty coordination more
    efficient, safer and they facilitate regulatory supervision. In the absence of European
    regulation, there is a risk that national legislators will set diverging national standards. To
    prevent fragmentation, it is necessary to define a single pan-European framework that will
    enable the cross-border recognition of trust services supporting the operation of electronic
    ledgers. This pan-European standard for node operators will apply notwithstanding other EU
    secondary legislation. Where electronic ledgers are used to support the issuing and/or trading
    of bonds, or for crypto assets, use cases should be compatible with all applicable financial
    rules for example with the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive11, the Payment Services
    Directive12 and the future Markets in Crypto Assets Regulation13. Where use cases involve
    personal data, service providers will need to comply with the GDPR.

    75% of all use cases for electronic ledgers were in banking and finance back in 2017. Use
    cases for electronic ledgers are today increasingly diverse, with 17% in communication &
    media; 15% in manufacturing & natural resources, 10% in the governmental sector, 8% in
    insurance, 5% in retail, 6% in transportation, 5% in utilities14.

    Finally, chapter VI has a new Article 48b to ensure that statistics on the use of the European
    Digital Identity Wallet is collected for monitoring the effectiveness of the amended
    Regulation.

                                    2021/0136 (COD)

                                                    Proposal for a

        REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL

        amending Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 as regards establishing a framework for a
                                            European Digital Identity

    THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND THE COUNCIL OF THE EUROPEAN UNION,

    Having regard to the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and in particular
    Article 114 thereof,

    Having regard to the proposal from the European Commission,

    After transmission of the draft legislative act to the national parliaments,

    Having regard to the opinion of the European Economic and Social Committee15,

    Acting in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure,

    Whereas:

    (1) The Commission Communication of 19 February 2020, entitled "Shaping Europe's
            Digital Future"16 announces a revision of Regulation (EU) No 910/2014 of the
            European Parliament and of the Council with the aim of improving its effectiveness,
            extend its benefits to the private sector and promote trusted digital identities for all
            Europeans.

    (2) In its conclusions of 1-2 October 202017, the European Council called on the
            Commission to propose the development of a Union-wide framework for secure public
            electronic identification, including interoperable digital signatures, to provide people
            with control over their online identity and data as well as to enable access to public,
            private and cross-border digital services.

    (3) The Commission Communication of 9 March 2021 entitled "2030 Digital Compass:
            the European way for the Digital Decade"18 sets the objective of a Union framework
            which, by 2030, leads to wide deployment of a trusted, user-controlled identity,
            allowing each user to control their own online interactions and presence.

    (4) A more harmonised approach to digital identification should reduce the risks and costs
            of the current fragmentation due to the use of divergent national solutions and will
            strengthen the Single Market by allowing citizens, other residents as defined by
            national law and businesses to identify online in a convenient and uniform way across
            the Union. Everyone should be able to securely access public and private services
            relying on an improved ecosystem for trust services and on verified proofs of identity
            and attestations of attributes, such as a university degree legally recognised and
            accepted everywhere in the Union. The framework for a European Digital Identity
            aims to achieve a shift from the reliance on national digital identity solutions only, to
            the provision of electronic attestations of attributes valid at European level. Providers
            of electronic attestations of attributes should benefit from a clear and uniform set of
            rules and public administrations should be able to rely on electronic documents in a
            given format.

    (5) To support the competitiveness of European businesses, online service providers
            should be able to rely on digital identity solutions recognised across the Union,
            irrespective of the Member State in which they have been issued, thus benefiting from
            a harmonised European approach to trust, security and interoperability. Users and
            service providers alike should be able to benefit from the same legal value provided to
            electronic attestations of attributes across the Union.

    (6) Regulation (EU) No 2016/67919 applies to the processing of personal data in the
            implementation of this Regulation. Therefore, this Regulation should lay down
            specific safeguards to prevent providers of electronic identification means and
            electronic attestation of attributes from combining personal data from other services
            with the personal data relating to the services falling within the scope of this
            Regulation.

    (7) It is necessary to set out the harmonised conditions for the establishment of a
            framework for European Digital Identity Wallets to be issued by Member States,
            which should empower all Union citizens and other residents as defined by national
            law to share securely data related to their identity in a user friendly and convenient
            way under the sole control of the user. Technologies used to achieve those objectives
            should be developed aiming towards the highest level of security, user convenience
            and wide usability. Member States should ensure equal access to digital identification
            to all their nationals and residents.

    (8) In order to ensure compliance within Union law or national law compliant with Union
            law, service providers should communicate their intent to rely on the European Digital
            Identity Wallets to Member States. That will allow Member States to protect users
            from fraud and prevent the unlawful use of identity data and electronic attestations of
            attributes as well as to ensure that the processing of sensitive data, like health data, can
            be verified by relying parties in accordance with Union law or national law.

    (9) All European Digital Identity Wallets should allow users to electronically identify and
            authenticate online and offline across borders for accessing a wide range of public and
            private services. Without prejudice to Member States' prerogatives as regards the
            identification of their nationals and residents, Wallets can also serve the institutional
            needs of public administrations, international organisations and the Union's
            institutions, bodies, offices and agencies. Offline use would be important in many
            sectors, including in the health sector where services are often provided through face-
            to-face interaction and ePrescriptions should be able to rely on QR-codes or similar
            technologies to verify authenticity. Relying on the level of assurance "high", the
            European Digital Identity Wallets should benefit from the potential offered by tamper-
            proof solutions such as secure elements, to comply with the security requirements
           under this Regulation. The European Digital Identity Wallets should also allow users
            to create and use qualified electronic signatures and seals which are accepted across
            the EU. To achieve simplification and cost reduction benefits to persons and
            businesses across the EU, including by enabling powers of representation and e-
            mandates, Member States should issue European Digital Identity Wallets relying on
            common standards to ensure seamless interoperability and a high level of security.
            Only Member States' competent authorities can provide a high degree of confidence in
            establishing the identity of a person and therefore provide assurance that the person
            claiming or asserting a particular identity is in fact the person he or she claims to be. It
            is therefore necessary that the European Digital Identity Wallets rely on the legal
            identity of citizens, other residents or legal entities. Trust in the European Digital
            Identity Wallets would be enhanced by the fact that issuing parties are required to
            implement appropriate technical and organisational measures to ensure a level of
            security commensurate to the risks raised for the rights and freedoms of the natural
            persons, in line with Regulation (EU) 2016/679.

    (10) In order to achieve a high level of security and trustworthiness, this Regulation
            establishes the requirements for European Digital Identity Wallets. The conformity of
            European Digital Identity Wallets with those requirements should be certified by
            accredited public or private sector bodies designated by Member States. Relying on a
            certification scheme based on the availability of commonly agreed standards with
            Member States should ensure a high level of trust and interoperability. Certification
            should in particular rely on the relevant European cybersecurity certifications schemes
            established pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2019/88120. Such certification should be
            without prejudice to certification as regards personal data processing pursuant to
            Regulation (EC) 2016/679

    (11) European Digital Identity Wallets should ensure the highest level of security for the
            personal data used for authentication irrespective of whether such data is stored locally
            or on cloud-based solutions, taking into account the different levels of risk. Using
            biometrics to authenticate is one of the identifications methods providing a high level
            of confidence, in particular when used in combination with other elements of
            authentication. Since biometrics represents a unique characteristic of a person, the use
            of biometrics requires organisational and security measures, commensurate to the risk
            that such processing may entail to the rights and freedoms of natural persons and in
            accordance with Regulation 2016/679.

    (12) To ensure that the European Digital Identity framework is open to innovation,
            technological development and future-proof, Member States should be encouraged to
            set-up jointly sandboxes to test innovative solutions in a controlled and secure
            environment in particular to improve the functionality, protection of personal data,
            security and interoperability of the solutions and to inform future updates of technical
            references and legal requirements. This environment should foster the inclusion of
            European Small and Medium Enterprises, start-ups and individual innovators and
            researchers.

    (13) Regulation (EU) No 2019/115721 strengthens the security of identity cards with
            enhanced security features by August 2021. Member States should consider the
            feasibility of notifying them under electronic identification schemes to extend the
            cross-border availability of electronic identification means.

    (14) The process of notification of electronic identification schemes should be simplified
            and accelerated to promote the access to convenient, trusted, secure and innovative
            authentication and identification solutions and, where relevant, to encourage private
            identity providers to offer electronic identification schemes to Member State's
            authorities for notification as national electronic identity card schemes under
            Regulation 910/2014.

    (15) Streamlining of the current notification and peer-review procedures will prevent
            heterogeneous approaches to the assessment of various notified electronic
            identification schemes and facilitate trust-building between Member States. New,
            simplified, mechanisms should foster Member States' cooperation on the security and
            interoperability of their notified electronic identification schemes.

    (16) Member States should benefit from new, flexible tools to ensure compliance with the
            requirements of this Regulation and of the relevant implementing acts. This
            Regulation should allow Member States to use reports and assessments performed by
            accredited conformity assessment bodies or voluntary ICT security certification
            schemes, such as certification schemes to be established at Union level under
            Regulation (EU) 2019/881, to support their claims on the alignment of the schemes or
            of parts thereof with the requirements of the Regulation on the interoperability and the
            security of the notified electronic identification schemes.

    (17) Service providers use the identity data provided by the set of person identification data
            available from electronic identification schemes pursuant to Regulation (EU) No
            910/2014 in order to match users from another Member State with the legal identity of
            that user. However, despite the use of the eIDAS data set, in many cases ensuring an
            accurate match requires additional information about the user and specific unique
            identification procedures at national level. To further support the usability of
            electronic identification means, this Regulation should require Member States to take
            specific measures to ensure a correct identity match in the process of electronic
            identification. For the same purpose, this Regulation should also extend the mandatory
            minimum data set and require the use of a unique and persistent electronic identifier in
            conformity with Union law in those cases where it is necessary to legally identify the
            user upon his/her request in a unique and persistent way.

    (18) In line with Directive (EU) 2019/88222, persons with disabilities should be able to use
            the European digital identity wallets, trust services and end-user products used in the
            provision of those services on an equal basis with other users.

    (19) This Regulation should not cover aspects related to the conclusion and validity of
            contracts or other legal obligations where there are requirements as regards form laid
            down by national or Union law. In addition, it should not affect national form
            requirements pertaining to public registers, in particular commercial and land registers.

    (20) The provision and use of trust services are becoming increasingly important for
            international trade and cooperation. International partners of the EU are establishing
            trust frameworks inspired by Regulation (EU) No 910/2014. Therefore, in order to
            facilitate the recognition of such services and their providers, implementing legislation
            may set the conditions under which trust frameworks of third countries could be
            considered equivalent to the trust framework for qualified trust services and providers
            in this Regulation, as a complement to the possibility of the mutual recognition of trust
            services and providers established in the Union and in third countries in accordance
            with Article 218 of the Treaty.

    (21) This Regulation should build on Union acts ensuring contestable and fair markets in
            the digital sector. In particular, it builds on the Regulation XXX/XXXX [Digital
            Markets Act], which introduces rules for providers of core platform services
            designated as gatekeepers and, among others, prohibits gatekeepers to require business
            users to use, offer or interoperate with an identification service of the gatekeeper in the
            context of services offered by the business users using the core platform services of
            that gatekeeper. Article 6(1)(f) of the Regulation XXX/XXXX [Digital Markets Act]
            requires gatekeepers to allow business users and providers of ancillary services access
            to and interoperability with the same operating system, hardware or software features
            that are available or used in the provision by the gatekeeper of any ancillary services.
            According to Article 2 (15) of [Digital Markets Act] identification services constitute a
            type of ancillary services. Business users and providers of ancillary services should
            therefore be able to access such hardware or software features, such as secure elements
            in smartphones, and to interoperate with them through the European Digital Identity
            Wallets or Member States' notified electronic identification means.

    (22) In order to streamline the cybersecurity obligations imposed on trust service providers,
            as well as to enable these providers and their respective competent authorities to
            benefit from the legal framework established by Directive XXXX/XXXX (NIS2
            Directive), trust services are required to take appropriate technical and organisational
            measures pursuant to Directive XXXX/XXXX (NIS2 Directive), such as measures
            addressing system failures, human error, malicious actions or natural phenomena in
            order to manage the risks posed to the security of network and information systems
            which those providers use in the provision of their services as well as to notify
            significant incidents and cyber threats in accordance with Directive XXXX/XXXX
            (NIS2 Directive). With regard to the reporting of incidents, trust service providers
            should notify any incidents having a significant impact on the provision of their
            services, including such caused by theft or loss of devices, network cable damages or
            incidents occurred in the context of identification of persons. The cybersecurity risk
            management requirements and reporting obligations under Directive XXXXXX
            [NIS2] should be considered complementary to the requirements imposed on trust
            service providers under this Regulation. Where appropriate, established national
            practices or guidance in relation to the implementation of security and reporting
            requirements and supervision of compliance with such requirements under Regulation
            (EU) No 910/2014 should continue to be applied by the competent authorities
            designated under Directive XXXX/XXXX (NIS2 Directive). Any requirements
            pursuant to this Regulation do not affect the obligation to notify personal data
            breaches under Regulation (EU) 2016/679.
    (23) Due consideration should be given to ensure effective cooperation between the NIS
            and eIDAS authorities. In cases where the supervisory body under this Regulation is
            different from the competent authorities designated under Directive XXXX/XXXX
            [NIS2], those authorities should cooperate closely, in a timely manner by exchanging
            the relevant information in order to ensure effective supervision and compliance of
            trust service providers with the requirements set out in this Regulation and Directive
            XXXX/XXXX [NIS2]. In particular, the supervisory bodies under this Regulation
            should be entitled to request the competent authority under Directive XXXXX/XXXX
            [NIS2] to provide the relevant information needed to grant the qualified status and to
            carry out supervisory actions to verify compliance of the trust service providers with
            the relevant requirements under NIS 2 or require them to remedy non-compliance.

    (24) It is essential to provide for a legal framework to facilitate cross-border recognition
            between existing national legal systems related to electronic registered delivery
            services. That framework could also open new market opportunities for Union trust
            service providers to offer new pan-European electronic registered delivery services
            and ensure that the identification of the recipients is ensured with a higher level of
            confidence than the identification of the sender.

    (25) In most cases, citizens and other residents cannot digitally exchange, across borders,
            information related to their identity, such as addresses, age and professional
            qualifications, driving licenses and other permits and payment data, securely and with
            a high level of data protection.

    (26) It should be possible to issue and handle trustworthy digital attributes and contribute to
            reducing administrative burden, empowering citizens and other residents to use them
            in their private and public transactions. Citizens and other residents should be able, for
            instance, to demonstrate ownership of a valid driving license issued by an authority in
            one Member State, which can be verified and relied upon by the relevant authorities in
            other Member States, to rely on their social security credentials or on future digital
            travel documents in a cross border context.

    (27) Any entity that collects, creates and issues attested attributes such as diplomas,
            licences, certificates of birth should be able to become a provider of electronic
            attestation of attributes. Relying parties should use the electronic attestations of
            attributes as equivalent to attestations in paper format. Therefore, an electronic
            attestation of attributes should not be denied legal effect on the grounds that it is in an
            electronic form or that it does not meet the requirements of the qualified electronic
            attestation of attributes. To that effect, general requirements should be laid down to
            ensure that a qualified electronic attestation of attributes has the equivalent legal effect
            of lawfully issued attestations in paper form. However, those requirements should
            apply without prejudice to Union or national law defining additional sector specific
            requirements as regards form with underlying legal effects and, in particular, the cross-
            border recognition of qualified electronic attestation of attributes, where appropriate.

    (28) Wide availability and usability of the European Digital Identity Wallets require
            their acceptance by private service providers. Private relying parties providing services
            in the areas of transport, energy, banking and financial services, social security, health,
            drinking water, postal services, digital infrastructure, education or telecommunications
            should accept the use of European Digital Identity Wallets for the provision of
            services where strong user authentication for online identification is required by
            national or Union law or by contractual obligation. Where very large online platforms
            as defined in Article 25.1. of Regulation [reference DSA Regulation] require users to            authenticate to access online services, those platforms should be mandated to accept
            the use of European Digital Identity Wallets upon voluntary request of the user. Users
            should be under no obligation to use the wallet to access private services, but if they
            wish to do so, large online platforms should accept the European Digital Identity
            Wallet for this purpose while respecting the principle of data minimisation. Given the
            importance of very large online platforms, due to their reach, in particular as expressed
            in number of recipients of the service and economic transactions this is necessary to
            increase the protection of users from fraud and secure a high level of data protection.
            Self-regulatory codes of conduct at Union level (`codes of conduct') should be
            developed in order to contribute to wide availability and usability of electronic
            identification means including European Digital Identity Wallets within the scope of
            this Regulation. The codes of conduct should facilitate wide acceptance of electronic
            identification means including European Digital Identity Wallets by those service
            providers which do not qualify as very large platforms and which rely on third party
            electronic identification services for user authentication. They should be developed
            within 12 months of the adoption of this Regulation. The Commission should assess
            the effectiveness of these provisions for the availability and usability for the user of
            the European Digital Identity Wallets after 18 months of their deployment and revise
            the provisions to ensure their acceptance by means of delegated acts in the light of this
            assessment.

    (29) The European Digital Identity Wallet should technically enable the selective
            disclosure of attributes to relying parties. This feature should become a basic design
            feature thereby reinforcing convenience and personal data protection including
            minimisation of processing of personal data.

    (30) Attributes provided by the qualified trust service providers as part of the qualified
            attestation of attributes should be verified against the authentic sources either directly
            by the qualified trust service provider or via designated intermediaries recognised at
            national level in accordance with national or Union law for the purpose of secure
            exchange of attested attributes between identity or attestation of attributes' service
            providers and relying parties.

    (31) Secure electronic identification and the provision of attestation of attributes should
            offer additional flexibility and solutions for the financial services sector to allow
            identification of customers and the exchange of specific attributes necessary to comply
            with, for example, customer due diligence requirements under the Anti Money
            Laundering Regulation, [reference to be added after the adoption of the proposal], with
            suitability requirements stemming from investor protection legislation, or to support
            the fulfilment of strong customer authentication requirements for account login and
            initiation of transactions in the field of payment services.

    (32) Website authentication services provide users with assurance that there is a genuine
            and legitimate entity standing behind the website. Those services contribute to the
            building of trust and confidence in conducting business online, as users will have
            confidence in a website that has been authenticated. The use of website authentication
            services by websites is voluntary. However, in order for website authentication to
            become a means to increasing trust, providing a better experience for the user and
            furthering growth in the internal market, this Regulation lays down minimal security
            and liability obligations for the providers of website authentication services and their
            services. To that end, web-browsers should ensure support and interoperability with
            Qualified certificates for website authentication pursuant to Regulation (EU) No
            910/2014. They should recognise and display Qualified certificates for website            authentication to provide a high level of assurance, allowing website owners to assert
            their identity as owners of a website and users to identify the website owners with a
            high degree of certainty. To further promote their usage, public authorities in Member
            States should consider incorporating Qualified certificates for website authentication
            in their websites.

    (33) Many Member States have introduced national requirements for services providing
            secure and trustworthy digital archiving in order to allow for the long term
            preservation of electronic documents and associated trust services. To ensure legal
            certainty and trust, it is essential to provide a legal framework to facilitate the cross
            border recognition of qualified electronic archiving services. That framework could
            also open new market opportunities for Union trust service providers.

    (34) Qualified electronic ledgers record data in a manner that ensures the uniqueness,
            authenticity and correct sequencing of data entries in a tamper proof manner. An
            electronic ledger combines the effect of time stamping of data with certainty about the
            data originator similar to e-signing and has the additional benefit of enabling more
            decentralised governance models that are suitable for multi-party co-operations. For
            example, it creates a reliable audit trail for the provenance of commodities in cross-
            border trade, supports the protection of intellectual property rights, enables flexibility
            markets in electricity, provides the basis for advanced solutions for self-sovereign
            identity and supports more efficient and transformative public services. To prevent
            fragmentation of the internal market, it is important to define a pan-European legal
            framework that allows for the cross-border recognition of trust services for the
            recording of data in electronic ledgers.

    (35) The certification as qualified trust service providers should provide legal certainty for
            use cases that build on electronic ledgers. This trust service for electronic ledgers and
            qualified electronic ledgers and the certification as qualified trust service provider for
            electronic ledgers should be notwithstanding the need for use cases to comply with
            Union law or national law in compliance with Union law. Use cases that involve the
            processing of personal data must comply with Regulation (EU) 2016/679. Use cases
            that involve crypto assets should be compatible with all applicable financial rules for
            example with the Markets in Financial Instruments Directive23, the Payment Services
            Directive24 and the future Markets in Crypto Assets Regulation25.

    (36) In order to avoid fragmentation and barriers, due to diverging standards and technical
            restrictions, and to ensure a coordinated process to avoid endangering the
            implementation of the future European Digital Identity framework, a process for close
            and structured cooperation between the Commission, Member States and the private
            sector is needed. To achieve this objective, Member States should cooperate within the
            framework set out in the Commission Recommendation XXX/XXXX [Toolbox for a
            coordinated approach towards a European Digital Identity Framework]26 to identify a
            Toolbox for a European Digital Identity framework. The Toolbox should include a
            comprehensive technical architecture and reference framework, a set of common
            standards and technical references and a set of guidelines and descriptions of best
            practices covering at least all aspects of the functionalities and interoperability of the
            European Digital Identity Wallets including eSignatures and of the qualified trust
            service for attestation of attributes as laid out in this regulation. In this context,
            Member States should also reach agreement on common elements of a business model
            and fee structure of the European Digital Identity Wallets, to facilitate take up, in
            particular by small and medium sized companies in a cross-border context. The
            content of the toolbox should evolve in parallel with and reflect the outcome of the
            discussion and process of adoption of the European Digital Identity Framework.

    (37) The European Data Protection Supervisor has been consulted pursuant to Article 42
            (1) of Regulation (EU) 2018/1525 of the European Parliament and of the Council27.

    (38) Regulation (EU) 910/2014 should therefore be amended accordingly,

    HAVE ADOPTED THIS REGULATION:

                                                        Article 1

    Regulation (EU) 910/2014 is amended as follows:

    (1) Article 1 is replaced by the following:

              `This Regulations aims at ensuring the proper functioning of the internal market and
              providing an adequate level of security of electronic identification means and trust
              services. For these purposes, this Regulation:

              (a) lays down the conditions under which Member States shall provide and
                     recognise electronic identification means of natural and legal persons, falling
                     under a notified electronic identification scheme of another Member State;

              (b) lays down rules for trust services, in particular for electronic transactions;

              (c) establishes a legal framework for electronic signatures, electronic seals,
                     electronic time stamps, electronic documents, electronic registered delivery
                     services, certificate services for website authentication, electronic archiving
                     and electronic attestation of attributes, the management of remote electronic
                     signature and seal creation devices, and electronic ledgers;

              (d) lays down the conditions for the issuing of European Digital Identity Wallets
                     by Member States.';

    (2) Article 2 is amended as follows:

              (a) paragraph 1 is replaced by the following:

                     `1. This Regulation applies to electronic identification schemes that have
                               been notified by a Member State, European Digital Identity Wallets issued by Member States and to trust service providers that are established in the Union.';

    (b) paragraph 3 is replaced by the following:

    `3. This Regulation does not affect national or Union law related to the
             conclusion and validity of contracts or other legal or procedural
             obligations relating to sector specific requirements as regards form with
             underlying legal effects.';

    (3) Article 3 is amended as follows:

    (a) point (2) is replaced by the following:

    `(2) `electronic identification means' means a material and/or immaterial
             unit, including European Digital Identity Wallets or ID cards following
             Regulation 2019/1157, containing person identification data and which
             is used for authentication for an online or offline service;';

    (b) point (4) is replaced by the following:

    `(4) `electronic identification scheme' means a system for electronic
             identification under which electronic identification means, are issued to
             natural or legal persons or natural persons representing legal persons;';

    (c) point (14) is replaced by the following:

    `(14)  `certificate for electronic signature' means an electronic attestation or
           set of attestations which links electronic signature validation data to a
           natural person and confirms at least the name or the pseudonym of that
           person;';

    (d) point (16) is replaced by the following:

    `(16) `trust service' means an electronic service normally provided against
           payment which consists of:

           (a) the creation, verification, and validation of electronic signatures,
                  electronic seals or electronic time stamps, electronic registered
                  delivery services, electronic attestation of attributes and certificates
                  related to those services;

           (b) the creation, verification and validation of certificates for website
                  authentication;

           (c) the preservation of electronic signatures, seals or certificates related
                  to those services;

           (d) the electronic archiving of electronic documents;

           (e) the management of remote electronic signature and seal creation
                  devices;

           (f) the recording of electronic data into an electronic ledger.';

    (e) point (21) is replaced by the following:

    `(21) `product' means hardware or software, or relevant components of
             hardware and / or software, which are intended to be used for the
             provision of electronic identification and trust services;';

    (f) the following points (23a) and (23b) are inserted:
    `(23a) `remote qualified signature creation device' means a qualified
             electronic signature creation device where a qualified trust service
             provider generates, manages or duplicates the electronic signature
             creation data on behalf of a signatory;

    (23b)  `remote qualified seal creation device' means a qualified electronic seal
           creation device where a qualified trust service provider generates,
           manages or duplicates the electronic signature creation data on behalf
           of a seal creator;';

    (g) point (29) is replaced by the following:

    `(29) `certificate for electronic seal' means an electronic attestation or set of
             attestations that links electronic seal validation data to a legal person
             and confirms the name of that person;';

    (h) point (41) is replaced by the following:

    `(41) `validation' means the process of verifying and confirming that an
             electronic signature or a seal or person identification data or an
             electronic attestation of attributes is valid;'

    (i) the following points (42) to (55) are added:

    `(42)  `European Digital Identity Wallet' is a product and service that allows
           the user to store identity data, credentials and attributes linked to
           her/his identity, to provide them to relying parties on request and to use
           them for authentication, online and offline, for a service in accordance
           with Article 6a; and to create qualified electronic signatures and seals;

    (43) `attribute' is a feature, characteristic or quality of a natural or legal
             person or of an entity, in electronic form;

    (44) `electronic attestation of attributes' means an attestation in electronic
             form that allows the authentication of attributes;

    (45) `qualified electronic attestation of attributes' means an electronic
             attestation of attributes, which is issued by a qualified trust service
             provider and meets the requirements laid down in Annex V;

    (46) `authentic source' is a repository or system, held under the
             responsibility of a public sector body or private entity, that contains
             attributes about a natural or legal person and is considered to be the
             primary source of that information or recognised as authentic in
             national law;

    (47) `electronic archiving' means a service ensuring the receipt, storage,
             deletion and transmission of electronic data or documents in order to
             guarantee their integrity, the accuracy of their origin and legal features
             throughout the conservation period;

    (48) `qualified electronic archiving service' means a service that meets the
             requirements laid down in Article 45g;

    (49) `EU Digital Identity Wallet Trust Mark' means an indication in a
             simple, recognisable and clear manner that a Digital Identity Wallet has
             been issued in accordance with this Regulation;
          (4)         (50) `strong user authentication' means an authentication based on the use
          (5)                  of two or more elements categorised as user knowledge , possession
          (6)                  and inherence that are independent, in such a way that the breach of
          (7)                  one does not compromise the reliability of the others, and is designed
                               in such a way to protect the confidentiality of the authentication data;
                      (51) `user account' means a mechanism that allows a user to access public
                               or private services on the terms and conditions established by the
                               service provider;

                      (52) `credential' means a proof of a person's abilities, experience, right or
                               permission;

                      (53) `electronic ledger' means a tamper proof electronic record of data,
                               providing authenticity and integrity of the data it contains, accuracy of
                               their date and time, and of their chronological ordering';

                      (54) `Personal data' means any information as defined in point 1 of Article 4
                               of Regulation (EU) 2016/679.';

                      (55) `unique identification' means a process where person identification
                               data or person identification means are matched with or linked to an
                               existing account belonging to the same person.';

               Article 5 is replaced by the following:

               `Article 5

               Pseudonyms in electronic transaction

               Without prejudice to the legal effect given to pseudonyms under national law, the use
               of pseudonyms in electronic transactions shall not be prohibited.';

               in Chapter II the heading is replaced by the following:

               `SECTION I

               ELECTRONIC IDENTIFICATION';

               Article 6 is deleted;

               the following Articles (6a, 6b, 6c and 6d) are inserted:

               `Article 6a

               European Digital Identity Wallets

               1. For the purpose of ensuring that all natural and legal persons in the Union have
                      secure, trusted and seamless access to cross-border public and private services,
                      each Member State shall issue a European Digital Identity Wallet within 12
                      months after the entry into force of this Regulation.

               2. European Digital Identity Wallets shall be issued:

                      (a) by a Member State;

                      (b) under a mandate from a Member State;

                      (c) independently but recognised by a Member State.

               3. European Digital Identity Wallets shall enable the user to:

                      (a) securely request and obtain, store, select, combine and share, in a manner
                             that is transparent to and traceable by the user, the necessary legal person                  identification data and electronic attestation of attributes to authenticate
                  online and offline in order to use online public and private services;

           (b) sign by means of qualified electronic signatures.

    4. Digital Identity Wallets shall, in particular:

           (a) provide a common interface:

                  (1) to qualified and non-qualified trust service providers issuing
                         qualified and non-qualified electronic attestations of attributes or
                         other qualified and non-qualified certificates for the purpose of
                         issuing such attestations and certificates to the European Digital
                         Identity Wallet;

                  (2) for relying parties to request and validate person identification data
                         and electronic attestations of attributes;

                  (3) for the presentation to relying parties of person identification data,
                         electronic attestation of attributes or other data such as credentials,
                         in local mode not requiring internet access for the wallet;

                  (4) for the user to allow interaction with the European Digital Identity
                         Wallet and display an "EU Digital Identity Wallet Trust Mark";

           (b) ensure that trust service providers of qualified attestations of attributes
                  cannot receive any information about the use of these attributes;

           (c) meet the requirements set out in Article 8 with regards to assurance level
                  "high", in particular as applied to the requirements for identity proofing
                  and verification, and electronic identification means management and
                  authentication;

           (d) provide a mechanism to ensure that the relying party is able to
                  authenticate the user and to receive electronic attestations of attributes;

           (e) ensure that the person identification data referred to in Articles 12(4),
                  point (d) uniquely and persistently represent the natural or legal person is
                  associated with it.

    5. Member States shall provide validation mechanisms for the European Digital
           Identity Wallets:

           (a) to ensure that its authenticity and validity can be verified;

           (b) to allow relying parties to verify that the attestations of attributes are
                  valid;

           (c) to allow relying parties and qualified trust service providers to verify the
                  authenticity and validity of attributed person identification data.

    6. The European Digital Identity Wallets shall be issued under a notified
           electronic identification scheme of level of assurance `high'. The use of the
           European Digital Identity Wallets shall be free of charge to natural persons.

    7. The user shall be in full control of the European Digital Identity Wallet. The
           issuer of the European Digital Identity Wallet shall not collect information
           about the use of the wallet which are not necessary for the provision of the
           wallet services, nor shall it combine person identification data and any other
           personal data stored or relating to the use of the European Digital Identity           Wallet with personal data from any other services offered by this issuer or from
           third-party services which are not necessary for the provision of the wallet
           services, unless the user has expressly requested it. Personal data relating to the
           provision of European Digital Identity Wallets shall be kept physically and
           logically separate from any other data held. If the European Digital Identity
           Wallet is provided by private parties in accordance to paragraph 1 (b) and (c),
           the provisions of article 45f paragraph 4 shall apply mutatis mutandis.

    8. Article 11 shall apply mutatis mutandis to the European Digital Identity Wallet.

    9. Article 24(2), points (b), (e), (g), and (h) shall apply mutatis mutandis to
           Member States issuing the European Digital Identity Wallets.

    10. The European Digital Identity Wallet shall be made accessible for persons with
           disabilities in accordance with the accessibility requirements of Annex I to
           Directive 2019/882.

    11. Within 6 months of the entering into force of this Regulation, the Commission
           shall establish technical and operational specifications and reference standards
           for the requirements referred to in paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 by means of an
           implementing act on the implementation of the European Digital Identity
           Wallet. This implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the
           examination procedure referred to in Article 48(2).

    Article 6b

    European Digital Identity Wallets Relying Parties

    1. Where relying parties intend to rely upon European Digital Identity Wallets
           issued in accordance with this Regulation, they shall communicate it to the
           Member State where the relying party is established to ensure compliance with
           requirements set out in Union law or national law for the provision of specific
           services. When communicating their intention to rely on European Digital
           Identity wallets, they shall also inform about the intended use of the European
           Digital Identity Wallet.

    2. Member States shall implement a common mechanism for the authentication
           of relying parties

    3. Relying parties shall be responsible for carrying out the procedure for
           authenticating person identification data and electronic attestation of attributes
           originating from European Digital Identity Wallets.

    4. Within 6 months of the entering into force of this Regulation, the Commission
           shall establish technical and operational specifications for the requirements
           referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 by means of an implementing act on the
           implementation of the European Digital Identity Wallets as referred to in
           Article 6a(10).

    Article 6c

    Certification of the European Digital Identity Wallets

    1. European Digital Identity Wallets that have been certified or for which a
           statement of conformity has been issued under a cybersecurity scheme
           pursuant to Regulation (EU) 2019/881 and the references of which have been
           published in the Official Journal of the European Union shall be presumed to
           be compliant with the cybersecurity relevant requirements set out in Article 6a                      paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 in so far as the cybersecurity certificate or statement of
                      conformity or parts thereof cover those requirements.

              2. Compliance with the requirements set out in paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 of Article
                      6a related to the personal data processing operations carried out by the issuer
                      of the European Digital Identity Wallets shall be certified pursuant to
                      Regulation (EU) 2016/679.

              3. The conformity of European Digital Identity Wallets with the requirements
                      laid down in article 6a paragraphs 3, 4 and 5 shall be certified by accredited
                      public or private bodies designated by Member States.

              4. Within 6 months of the entering into force of this Regulation, the Commission
                      shall, by means of implementing acts, establish a list of standards for the
                      certification of the European Digital Identity Wallets referred to in paragraph
                      3.

              5. Member States shall communicate to the Commission the names and addresses
                      of the public or private bodies referred to in paragraph 3. The Commission
                      shall make that information available to Member States.

              6. The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in accordance
                     with Article 47 concerning the establishment of specific criteria to be met by
                     the designated bodies referred to in paragraph 3.

              Article 6d

              Publication of a list of certified European Digital Identity Wallets

              1. Member States shall inform the Commission without undue delay of the
                      European Digital Identity Wallets that have been issued pursuant to Article 6a
                      and certified by the bodies referred to in Article 6c paragraph 3 They shall also
                      inform the Commission, without undue delay where the certification is
                      cancelled.

              2. On the basis of the information received, the Commission shall establish,
                      publish and maintain a list of certified European Digital Identity Wallets.

              3. Within 6 months of the entering into force of this Regulation, the Commission
                      shall define formats and procedures applicable for the purposes of paragraph 1.
                      by means of an implementing act on the implementation of the European
                      Digital Identity Wallets as referred to in Article 6a(10).

    (8) the following heading is inserted before Article 7:

              `SECTION II

              ELECTRONIC IDENTIFICATION SCHEMES';

    (9) the introductory sentence of Article 7 is replaced by the following:

              `Pursuant to Article 9(1) Member States shall notify, within 12 months after the entry
              into force of this Regulation at least one electronic identification scheme including at
              least one identification means:';

    (10) in Article 9 paragraphs 2 and 3 are replaced by the following:

              `2. The Commission shall publish in the Official Journal of the European Union a
                      list of the electronic identification schemes which were notified pursuant to
                      paragraph 1 of this Article and the basic information thereon.              3. The Commission shall publish in the Official Journal of the European Union
                      the amendments to the list referred to in paragraph 2 within one month from
                      the date of receipt of that notification.';

    (11) the following Article 10a is inserted:

              `Article 10a

              Security breach of the European Digital Identity Wallets

              1. Where European Digital Wallets issued pursuant to Article 6a and the
                      validation mechanisms referred to in Article 6a(5) points (a), (b) and (c) are
                      breached or partly compromised in a manner that affects their reliability or the
                      reliability of the other European Digital Identity Wallets, the issuing Member
                      State shall, without delay, suspend the issuance and revoke the validity of the
                      European Digital Identity Wallet and inform the other Member States and the
                      Commission accordingly.

              2. Where the breach or compromise referred to in paragraph 1 is remedied, the
                      issuing Member State shall re-establish the issuance and the use of the
                      European Digital Identity Wallet and inform other Member States and the
                      Commission without undue delay.

              3. If the breach or compromise referred to in paragraph 1 is not remedied within
                      three months of the suspension or revocation, the Member State concerned
                      shall withdraw the European Digital Wallet concerned and inform the other
                      Member States and the Commission on the withdrawal accordingly. Where it
                      is justified by the severity of the breach, the European Digital Identity Wallet
                      concerned shall be withdrawn without delay.

              4. The Commission shall publish in the Official Journal of the European Union
                      the corresponding amendments to the list referred to in Article 6d without
                      undue delay.

              5. Within 6 months of the entering into force of this Regulation, the Commission
                      shall further specify the measures referred to in paragraphs 1 and 3 by means
                      of an implementing act on the implementation of the European Digital Identity
                      Wallets as referred to in Article 6a(10).

    (12) the following Article 11a is inserted:

              `Article 11a

              Unique Identification

              1. When notified electronic identification means and the European Digital
                      Identity Wallets are used for authentication, Member States shall ensure unique
                      identification.

              2. Member States shall, for the purposes of this Regulation, include in the
                      minimum set of person identification data referred to in Article 12.4.(d), a
                      unique and persistent identifier in conformity with Union law, to identify the
                      user upon their request in those cases where identification of the user is
                      required by law.

              3. Within 6 months of the entering into force of this Regulation, the Commission
                      shall further specify the measures referred to in paragraph 1 and 2 by means of                      an implementing act on the implementation of the European Digital Identity
                      Wallets as referred to in Article 6a(10).

    (13) Article 12 is amended as follows:

              (a) in paragraph 3, points (c) and (d) are deleted;

              (b) in paragraph 4, point (d) is replaced by the following:

                     `(d) a reference to a minimum set of person identification data necessary to
                               uniquely and persistently represent a natural or legal person;';

              (c) in paragraph 6, point (a) of is replaced by the following:

                     `(a) the exchange of information, experience and good practice as regards
                               electronic identification schemes and in particular technical
                               requirements related to interoperability, unique identification and
                               assurance levels;';

    (14) the following Article 12a is inserted:

              `Article 12a

              Certification of electronic identification schemes

              1. Conformity of notified electronic identification schemes with the requirements
                      laid down in Article 6a, Article 8 and Article 10 may be certified by public or
                      private bodies designated by Member States.

              2. The peer-review of electronic identification schemes referred to in Article
                      12(6), point (c) shall not apply to electronic identification schemes or part of
                      such schemes certified in accordance with paragraph 1. Member States may
                      use a certificate or a Union statement of conformity issued in accordance with
                      a relevant European cybersecurity certification scheme established pursuant to
                      Regulation (EU) 2019/881 to demonstrate compliance of such schemes with
                      the requirements set out in Article 8(2) regarding the assurance levels of
                      electronic identification schemes.

              3. Member States shall notify to the Commission with the names and addresses of
                      the public or private body referred to in paragraph 1. The Commission shall
                      make that information available to Member States.';

    (15) the following heading is inserted after Article 12a:

              `SECTION III

              CROSS-BORDER RELIANCE ON ELECTRONIC IDENTIFICATION
              MEANS';

    (16) the following Articles 12b and 12c are inserted:

              `Article 12b

              Cross-border reliance on European Digital Identity Wallets

              1. Where Member States require an electronic identification using an electronic
                      identification means and authentication under national law or by administrative
                      practice to access an online service provided by a public sector body, they shall
                      also accept European Digital Identity Wallets issued in compliance with this
                      Regulation.    2. Where private relying parties providing services are required by national or
           Union law, to use strong user authentication for online identification, or where
           strong user authentication is required by contractual obligation, including in
           the areas of transport, energy, banking and financial services, social security,
           health, drinking water, postal services, digital infrastructure, education or
           telecommunications, private relying parties shall also accept the use of
           European Digital Identity Wallets issued in accordance with Article 6a.

    3. Where very large online platforms as defined in Regulation [reference DSA
           Regulation] Article 25.1. require users to authenticate to access online services,
           they shall also accept the use of European Digital Identity Wallets issued in
           accordance with Article 6a strictly upon voluntary request of the user and in
           respect of the minimum attributes necessary for the specific online service for
           which authentication is requested, such as proof of age.

    4. The Commission shall encourage and facilitate the development of self-
           regulatory codes of conduct at Union level (`codes of conduct'), in order to
           contribute to wide availability and usability of European Digital Identity
           Wallets within the scope of this Regulation. These codes of conduct shall
           ensure acceptance of electronic identification means including European
           Digital Identity Wallets within the scope of this Regulation in particular by
           service providers relying on third party electronic identification services for
           user authentication. The Commission will facilitate the development of such
           codes of conduct in close cooperation with all relevant stakeholders and
           encourage service providers to complete the development of codes of conduct
           within 12 months of the adoption of this Regulation and effectively implement
           them within 18 months of the adoption of the Regulation.

    5. The Commission shall make an assessment within 18 months after deployment
           of the European Digital Identity Wallets whether on the basis of evidence
           showing availability and usability of the European Digital Identity Wallet,
           additional private online service providers shall be mandated to accept the use
           of the European Digital identity Wallet strictly upon voluntary request of the
           user. Criteria of assessment may include extent of user base, cross-border
           presence of service providers, technological development, evolution in usage
           patterns. The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts based
           on this assessment, regarding a revision of the requirements for recognition of
           the European Digital Identity wallet under points 1 to 4 of this article.

    6. For the purposes of this Article, European Digital Identity Wallets shall not be
           subject to the requirements referred to in articles 7 and 9.

    Article 12c

    Mutual recognition of other electronic identification means

    1. Where electronic identification using an electronic identification means and
           authentication is required under national law or by administrative practice to
           access an online service provided by a public sector body in a Member State,
           the electronic identification means, issued in another Member State shall be
           recognised in the first Member State for the purposes of cross-border
           authentication for that online service, provided that the following conditions
           are met:                     (a) the electronic identification means is issued under an electronic
                             identification scheme that is included in the list referred to in Article 9;

                     (b) the assurance level of the electronic identification means corresponds to
                             an assurance level equal to or higher than the assurance level required by
                             the relevant public sector body to access that online service in the
                             Member State concerned, and in any case not lower than an assurance
                             level `substantial';

                     (c) the relevant public sector body in the Member State concerned uses the
                             assurance level `substantial' or `high' in relation to accessing that online
                             service.

                             Such recognition shall take place no later than 6 months after the
                             Commission publishes the list referred to in point (a) of the first
                             subparagraph.

              2. An electronic identification means which is issued within the scope of an
                      electronic identification scheme included in the list referred to in Article 9 and
                      which corresponds to the assurance level `low' may be recognised by public
                      sector bodies for the purposes of cross-border authentication for the online
                      service provided by those bodies.';

    (17) In Article 13, paragraph 1 is replaced by the following:

              `1. Notwithstanding paragraph 2 of this Article, trust service providers shall be
                      liable for damage caused intentionally or negligently to any natural or legal
                      person due to a failure to comply with the obligations under this Regulation
                      and with the cybersecurity risk management obligations under Article 18 of the
                      Directive XXXX/XXXX [NIS2].';

    (18) Article 14 is replaced by the following:

              `Article 14

              International aspects

              1. The Commission may adopt implementing acts, in accordance with Article
                      48(2), setting out the conditions under which the requirements of a third
                      country applicable to the trust service providers established in its territory and
                      to the trust services they provide can be considered equivalent to the
                      requirements applicable to qualified trust service providers established in the
                      Union and to the qualified trust services they provide.

              2. Where the Commission has adopted an implementing act pursuant to
                      paragraph 1 or concluded an international agreement on the mutual recognition
                      of trust services in accordance with Article 218 of the Treaty, trust services
                      provided by providers established in the third country concerned shall be
                      considered equivalent to qualified trust services provided by qualified trust
                      service providers established in the Union.';

    (19) Article 15 is replaced by the following:

              `Article 15

              Accessibility for persons with disabilities

              The provision of Trust services and end-user products used in the provision of those
              services shall be made accessible for persons with disabilities in accordance with the              accessibility requirements of Annex I of Directive 2019/882 on the accessibility
              requirements for products and services.';

    (20) Article 17 is amended as follows:

              (a) paragraph 4 is amended as follows:

                     (1) point (c) of paragraph 4 is replaced by the following:

                             `(c) to inform the relevant national competent authorities of the
                                        Member States concerned, designated pursuant to Directive
                                        (EU) XXXX/XXXX [NIS2], of any significant breaches of
                                        security or loss of integrity they become aware of in the
                                        performance of their tasks. where the significant breach of
                                        security or loss of integrity concerns other Member States, the
                                        supervisory body shall inform the single point of contact of the
                                        Member State concerned designated pursuant to Directive (EU)
                                        XXXX/XXXX (NIS2);';

                     (2) point (f) is replaced by the following:

                             `(f) to cooperate with supervisory authorities established under
                                        Regulation (EU) 2016/679, in particular, by informing them
                                        without undue delay, about the results of audits of qualified
                                        trust service providers, where personal data protection rules
                                        have been breached and about security breaches which
                                        constitute personal data breaches;';

              (b) paragraph 6 is replaced by the following:

                     `6. By 31 March each year, each supervisory body shall submit to the
                               Commission a report on its main activities during the previous calendar
                               year.';

              (c) paragraph 8 is replaced by the following:

                     `8. Within 12 months of the entering into force of this Regulation, the
                               Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, further specify the
                               tasks of the Supervisory Authorities referred to in paragraph 4 and
                               define the formats and procedures for the report referred to in
                               paragraph 6. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance
                               with the examination procedure referred to in Article 48(2).';

    (21) Article 18 is amended as follows:

              (a) the title of Article 18 is replaced by the following:

                     `Mutual assistance and cooperation';

              (b) paragraph 1 is replaced by the following:

                     `1. Supervisory bodies shall cooperate with a view to exchanging good
                               practice and information regarding the provision of trust services.';

              (c) the following paragraphs 4 and 5 are added:

                     `4. Supervisory bodies and national competent authorities under Directive
                               (EU) XXXX/XXXX of the European Parliament and of the Council
                               [NIS2] shall cooperate and assist each other to ensure that trust service
                               providers comply with the requirements laid down in this Regulation                               and in Directive (EU) XXXX/XXXX [NIS2]. The supervisory body
                               shall request the national competent authority under Directive
                               XXXX/XXXX [NIS2] to carry out supervisory actions to verify
                               compliance of the trust service providers with the requirements under
                               Directive XXXX/XXXX (NIS2), to require the trust service providers
                               to remedy any failure to comply with those requirements, to provide
                               timely the results of any supervisory activities linked to trust service
                               providers and to inform the supervisory bodies about relevant incidents
                               notified in accordance with Directive XXXX/XXXX [NIS2].

                     5. Within 12 months of the entering into force of this Regulation, the
                               Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, establish the
                               necessary procedural arrangements to facilitate the cooperation
                               between the Supervisory Authorities referred to in paragraph 1.';

    (22) Article 20 is amended as follows:

              (a) paragraph 1 is replaced by the following

                     `1. Qualified trust service providers shall be audited at their own expense
                               at least every 24 months by a conformity assessment body. the audit
                               shall confirm that the qualified trust service providers and the qualified
                               trust services provided by them fulfil the requirements laid down in this
                               Regulation and in Article 18 of Directive (EU) XXXX/XXXX [NIS2].
                               qualified trust service providers shall submit the resulting conformity
                               assessment report to the supervisory body within three working days of
                               receipt.';

              (b) in paragraph 2, the last sentence is replaced by the following

                     `Where personal data protection rules appear to have been breached, the
                     supervisory body shall inform the supervisory authorities under Regulation
                     (EU) 2016/679 of the results of its audits.';

              (c) paragraphs 3 and 4 are replaced by the following:

                     `3. Where the qualified trust service provider fails to fulfil any of the
                               requirements set out by this Regulation, the supervisory body shall
                               require it to provide a remedy within a set time limit, if applicable.

                               where that provider does not provide a remedy and, where applicable
                               within the time limit set by the supervisory body, the supervisory body,
                               taking into account in particular, the extent, duration and consequences
                               of that failure, may withdraw the qualified status of that provider or of
                               the service concerned which it provides and, request it, where
                               applicable within a set time limit, to comply with the requirements of
                               Directive XXXX/XXXX[NIS2]. The supervisory body shall inform the
                               body referred to in Article 22(3) for the purposes of updating the
                               trusted lists referred to in Article 22(1).

                               The supervisory body shall inform the qualified trust service provider
                               of the withdrawal of its qualified status or of the qualified status of the
                               service concerned.

                     4. Within 12 months of the entering into force of this regulation, the
                               Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, establish reference
                               number for the following standards:
                             (a) the accreditation of the conformity assessment bodies and for the
                                    conformity assessment report referred to in paragraph 1;

                             (b) the auditing requirements for the conformity assessment bodies to
                                    carry out their conformity assessment of the qualified trust service
                                    providers as referred to in paragraph 1, carried out by the
                                    conformity assessment bodies;

                             (c) the conformity assessment schemes for carrying out the conformity
                                    assessment of the qualified trust service providers by the
                                    conformity assessment bodies and for the provision of the
                                    conformity assessment report referred to in paragraph 1.

                                    Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the
                                    examination procedure referred to in Article 48(2).';

    (23) Article 21 is amended as follows:

              (a) paragraph 2 is replaced by the following:

                     `2. The supervisory body shall verify whether the trust service provider
                               and the trust services provided by it comply with the requirements laid
                               down in this Regulation, and in particular, with the requirements for
                               qualified trust service providers and for the qualified trust services they
                               provide.

                               In order to verify the compliance of the trust service provider with the
                               requirements laid down in Article 18 of Dir XXXX [NIS2], the
                               supervisory body shall request the competent authorities referred to in
                               Dir XXXX [NIS2] to carry out supervisory actions in that regard and to
                               provide information about the outcome within three days from their
                               completion.

                               Where the supervisory body concludes that the trust service provider
                               and the trust services provided by it comply with the requirements
                               referred to in the first subparagraph, the supervisory body shall grant
                               qualified status to the trust service provider and the trust services it
                               provides and inform the body referred to in Article 22(3) for the
                               purposes of updating the trusted lists referred to in Article 22(1), not
                               later than three months after notification in accordance with paragraph
                               1 of this Article.

                               Where the verification is not concluded within three months of
                               notification, the supervisory body shall inform the trust service
                               provider specifying the reasons for the delay and the period within
                               which the verification is to be concluded.';

              (b) paragraph 4 is replaced with the following:

                     `4. Within 12 months of the entering into force of this Regulation, the
                               Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, define the formats
                               and procedures of the notification and verification for the purposes of
                               paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article. Those implementing acts shall be
                               adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in
                               Article 48(2).';

    (24) in Article 23 the following paragraph 2a is added:
              `2a. Paragraph 1 and 2 shall also apply to trust service providers established in third
                      countries and to the services they provide, provided that they have been
                      recognised in the Union in accordance with Article 14.';

    (25) Article 24 is amended as follows:

              (a) paragraph 1 is replaced by the following:

                     `1. When issuing a qualified certificate or a qualified electronic attestation
                               of attributes for a trust service, a qualified trust service provider shall
                               verify the identity and, if applicable, any specific attributes of the
                               natural or legal person to whom the qualified certificate or the qualified
                               electronic attestation of attribute is issued.

                               The information referred to in the first subparagraph shall be verified
                               by the qualified trust service provider, either directly or by relying on a
                               third party, in any of the following ways:

                             (a) by means of a notified electronic identification means which meets
                                    the requirements set out in Article 8 with regard to the assurance
                                    levels `substantial' or `high';

                             (b) by means of qualified electronic attestations of attributes or a
                                    certificate of a qualified electronic signature or of a qualified
                                    electronic seal issued in compliance with point (a), (c) or (d);

                             (c) by using other identification methods which ensure the
                                    identification of the natural person with a high level of confidence,
                                    the conformity of which shall be confirmed by a conformity
                                    assessment body;

                             (d) through the physical presence of the natural person or of an
                                    authorised representative of the legal person by appropriate
                                    procedures and in accordance with national laws if other means are
                                    not available.';

              (b) the following paragraph 1a is inserted:

                     `1a. Within 12 months after the entry into force of this Regulation, the
                               Commission shall by means of implementing acts, set out minimum
                               technical specifications, standards and procedures with respect to the
                               verification of identity and attributes in accordance with paragraph 1,
                               point c. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with
                               the examination procedure referred to in Article 48(2).';

              (c) paragraph 2 is amended as follows:

                     (1) point (d) is replaced by the following:

                             `(d) before entering into a contractual relationship, inform, in a
                                        clear, comprehensive and easily accessible manner, in a
                                        publicly accessible space and individually any person seeking to
                                        use a qualified trust service of the precise terms and conditions
                                        regarding the use of that service, including any limitations on its
                                        use;';

                     (2) the new points (fa) and (fb) are inserted:
    `(fa) have appropriate policies and take corresponding measures to
               manage legal, business, operational and other direct or indirect
               risks to the provision of the qualified trust service.
               Notwithstanding the provisions of Article 18 of Directive EU
               XXXX/XXX [NIS2], those measures shall include at least the
               following:

         (i) measures related to registration and on-boarding procedures
         to a service;

         (ii) measures related to procedural or administrative checks;

         (iii) measures related to the management and implementation of
         services.

    (fb) notify the supervisory body and, where applicable, other
               relevant bodies of any linked breaches or disruptions in the
               implementation of the measures referred to in paragraph (fa),
               points (i), (ii) and, (iii) that has a significant impact on the trust
               service provided or on the personal data maintained therein.';

    (3) point (g) and (h) are replaced by the following:

    `(g) take appropriate measures against forgery, theft or
               misappropriation of data or, without right, deleting, altering or
               rendering data inaccessible;

    (h)  record and keep accessible for as long as necessary after the

         activities of the qualified trust service provider have ceased, all

         relevant information concerning data issued and received by the

         qualified trust service provider, for the purpose of providing

         evidence in legal proceedings and for the purpose of ensuring

         continuity of the service. Such recording may be done

         electronically;';

    (4) point (j) is deleted;

    (d) the following paragraph 4a is inserted:

    `4a. Paragraph 3 and 4 shall apply accordingly to the revocation of
             electronic attestations of attributes.';

    (e) paragraph 5 is replaced by the following:

    `5. Within 12 months of the entering into force of this Regulation, the
             Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, establish reference
             numbers of standards for the requirements referred to in paragraph 2.
             compliance with the requirements laid down in this Article shall be
             presumed, where trustworthy systems and products meet those
             standards. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance
             with the examination procedure referred to in Article 48(2).';

    (f) the following paragraph 6 is inserted:

    `6. The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts regarding
             the additional measures referred to in paragraph 2(fa).';

    (26) In Article 28, paragraph 6 is replaced by the following:
              `6. Within 12 months after the entry into force of this Regulation, the Commission
                      shall, by means of implementing acts, establish reference numbers of standards
                      for qualified certificates for electronic signature. Compliance with the
                      requirements laid down in Annex I shall be presumed where a qualified
                      certificate for electronic signature meets those standards. Those implementing
                      acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to
                      in Article 48(2).';

    (27) In Article 29, the following new paragraph 1a is added:

              `1a. Generating, managing and duplicating electronic signature creation data on
                     behalf of the signatory may only be done by a qualified trust service provider
                     providing a qualified trust service for the management of a remote electronic
                     qualified signature creation device.';

    (28) the following Article 29a is inserted:

              `Article 29a

              Requirements for a qualified service for the management of remote electronic
                     signature creation devices

              1. The management of remote qualified electronic signature creation devices as a
                     qualified service may only be carried out by a qualified trust service provider
                     that:

                     (a) Generates or manages electronic signature creation data on behalf of the
                             signatory;

                     (b) notwithstanding point (1)(d) of Annex II, duplicates the electronic
                             signature creation data only for back-up purposes provided the following
                             requirements are met:

                             the security of the duplicated datasets must be at the same level as for the
                             original datasets;

                             the number of duplicated datasets shall not exceed the minimum needed
                             to ensure continuity of the service.

                     (c) complies with any requirements identified in the certification report of
                             the specific remote qualified signature creation device issued pursuant to
                             Article 30.

              2. Within 12 months of the entering into force of this Regulation, the Commission
                     shall, by means of implementing acts, establish technical specifications and
                     reference numbers of standards for the purposes of paragraph 1.';

    (29) In Article 30, the following paragraph 3a is inserted:

              `3a. The certification referred to in paragraph 1 shall be valid for 5 years,
                      conditional upon a regular 2 year vulnerabilities assessment. Where
                      vulnerabilities are identified and not remedied, the certification shall be
                      withdrawn.';

    (30) In Article 31, paragraph 3 is replaced by the following:

              `3. Within 12 months of the entering into force of this Regulation, the
                      Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, define formats and
                      procedures applicable for the purpose of paragraph 1. Those implementing acts                      shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in
                      Article 48(2).';

    (31) Article 32 is amended as follows:

              (a) in paragraph 1, the following sub-paragraph is added:

                     `Compliance with the requirements laid down in the first sub-paragraph shall
                      be presumed where the validation of qualified electronic signatures meet the
                      standards referred to in paragraph 3.';

              (b) paragraph 3 is replaced by the following:

                     `3. Within 12 months of the entering into force of this Regulation, the
                               Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, establish reference
                               numbers of standards for the validation of qualified electronic
                               signatures. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance
                               with the examination procedure referred to in Article 48(2).';

    (32) Article 34 is replaced by the following:

              `Article 34

              Qualified preservation service for qualified electronic signatures

              1. A qualified preservation service for qualified electronic signatures may only be
                      provided by a qualified trust service provider that uses procedures and
                      technologies capable of extending the trustworthiness of the qualified
                      electronic signature beyond the technological validity period.

              2. Compliance with the requirements laid down in the paragraph 1 shall be
                      presumed where the arrangements for the qualified preservation service for
                      qualified electronic signatures meet the standards referred to in paragraph 3.

              3. Within 12 months of the entering into force of this Regulation, the
                      Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, establish reference
                      numbers of standards for the qualified preservation service for qualified
                      electronic signatures. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance
                      with the examination procedure referred to In Article 48(2).';

    (33) Article 37 is amended as follows:

              (a) the following paragraph 2a is inserted:

                     `2a. Compliance with the requirements for advanced electronic seals
                               referred to in Article 36 and in paragraph 5 of this Article shall be
                               presumed where an advanced electronic seal meets the standards
                               referred to in paragraph 4.';

              (b) paragraph 4 is replaced by the following:

                     `4. Within 12 months of the entering into force of this Regulation, the
                               Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, establish reference
                               numbers of standards for advanced electronic seals. Those
                               implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination
                               procedure referred to in Article 48(2).';

    (34) Article 38 is amended as follows:

              (a) paragraph 1 is replaced by the following:                     `1. Qualified certificates for electronic seals shall meet the requirements
                               laid down in Annex III. Compliance with the requirements laid down in
                               Annex III shall be presumed where a qualified certificate for electronic
                               seal meets the standards referred to in paragraph 6.';

              (b) paragraph 6 is replaced by the following:

                     `6. Within 12 months of the entering into force of this Regulation, the
                               Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, establish reference
                               numbers of standards for qualified certificates for electronic seals.
                               Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the
                               examination procedure referred to in Article 48(2).';

    (35) the following Article 39a is inserted:

              `Article 39a

              Requirements for a qualified service for the management of remote electronic
              seal creation devices

              Article 29a shall apply mutatis mutandis to a qualified service for the management of
              remote electronic seal creation devices.';

    (36) Article 42 is amended as follows:

              (a) the following new paragraph 1a is inserted:

                     `1a. Compliance with the requirements laid down in paragraph 1 shall be
                               presumed where the binding of date and time to data and the accurate
                               time source meet the standards referred to in paragraph 2.';

              (b) paragraph 2 is replaced by the following

                     `2. Within 12 months of the entering into force of this Regulation, the
                               Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, establish reference
                               numbers of standards for the binding of date and time to data and for
                               accurate time sources. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in
                               accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article
                               48(2).';

    (37) Article 44 is amended as follows:

              (a) the following paragraph 1a is inserted:

                     `1a. Compliance with the requirements laid down in paragraph 1 shall be
                               presumed where the process for sending and receiving data meets the
                               standards referred to in paragraph 2.';

              (b) paragraph 2 is replaced by the following:

                     `2. Within 12 months of the entering into force of this Regulation, the
                               Commission shall, by means of implementing acts, establish reference
                               numbers of standards for processes for sending and receiving data.
                               Those implementing acts shall be adopted in accordance with the
                               examination procedure referred to in Article 48(2).';

    (38) Article 45 is replaced by the following:

              `Article 45

              Requirements for qualified certificates for website authentication
              1. Qualified certificates for website authentication shall meet the requirements
                      laid down in Annex IV. Qualified certificates for website authentication shall
                      be deemed compliant with the requirements laid down in Annex IV where they
                      meet the standards referred to in paragraph 3.

              2. Qualified certificates for website authentication referred to in paragraph 1 shall
                      be recognised by web-browsers. For those purposes web-browsers shall ensure
                      that the identity data provided using any of the methods is displayed in a user
                      friendly manner. Web-browsers shall ensure support and interoperability with
                      qualified certificates for website authentication referred to in paragraph 1, with
                      the exception of enterprises, considered to be microenterprises and small
                      enterprises in accordance with Commission Recommendation 2003/361/EC in
                      the first 5 years of operating as providers of web-browsing services.

              3. Within 12 months of the entering into force of this Regulation, the Commission
                     shall, by means of implementing acts, provide the specifications and reference
                     numbers of standards for qualified certificates for website authentication
                     referred to in paragraph 1. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in
                     accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 48(2).';

    (39) the following sections 9, 10 and 11 are inserted after Article 45:

              `SECTION 9

              ELECTRONIC ATTESTATION OF ATTRIBUTES

              Article 45a

              Legal effects of electronic attestation of attributes

              1. An electronic attestation of attributes shall not be denied legal effect and
                      admissibility as evidence in legal proceedings solely on the grounds that it is in
                      electronic form.

              2. A qualified electronic attestation of attributes shall have the same legal effect
                      as lawfully issued attestations in paper form.

              3. A qualified electronic attestation of attributes issued in one Member State shall
                      be recognised as a qualified electronic attestation of attributes in any other
                      Member State.

              Article 45b

              Electronic attestation of attributes in public services

              When an electronic identification using an electronic identification means and
              authentication is required under national law to access an online service provided by
              a public sector body, person identification data in the electronic attestation of
              attributes shall not substitute electronic identification using an electronic
              identification means and authentication for electronic identification unless
              specifically allowed by the Member State or the public sector body. In such a case,
              qualified electronic attestation of attributes from other Member States shall also be
              accepted.

              Article 45c

              Requirements for qualified attestation of attributes

              1. Qualified electronic attestation of attributes shall meet the requirements laid
                      down in Annex V. A qualified electronic attestation of attributes shall be           deemed to be compliant with the requirements laid down in Annex V, where it
           meets the standards referred to in paragraph 4.

    2. Qualified electronic attestations of attributes shall not be subject to any
           mandatory requirement in addition to the requirements laid down in Annex V.

    3. Where a qualified electronic attestation of attributes has been revoked after
           initial issuance, it shall lose its validity from the moment of its revocation, and
           its status shall not in any circumstances be reverted.

    4. Within 6 months of the entering into force of this Regulation, the Commission
           shall establish reference numbers of standards for qualified electronic
           attestations of attributes by means of an implementing act on the
           implementation of the European Digital Identity Wallets as referred to in
           Article 6a(10).

    Article 45d

    Verification of attributes against authentic sources

    1. Member States shall ensure that, at least for the attributes listed in Annex VI,
           wherever these attributes rely on authentic sources within the public sector,
           measures are taken to allow qualified providers of electronic attestations of
           attributes to verify by electronic means at the request of the user, the
           authenticity of the attribute directly against the relevant authentic source at
           national level or via designated intermediaries recognised at national level in
           accordance with national or Union law.

    2. Within 6 months of the entering into force of this Regulation, taking into
           account relevant international standards, the Commission shall set out the
           minimum technical specifications, standards and procedures with reference to
           the catalogue of attributes and schemes for the attestation of attributes and
           verification procedures for qualified electronic attestations of attributes by
           means of an implementing act on the implementation of the European Digital
           Identity Wallets as referred to in Article 6a(10).

    Article 45e

    Issuing of electronic attestation of attributes to the European Digital Identity
    Wallets

    Providers of qualified electronic attestations of attributes shall provide an interface
    with the European Digital Identity Wallets issued in accordance in Article 6a.

    Article 45f

    Additional rules for the provision of electronic attestation of attributes services

    1. Providers of qualified and non-qualified electronic attestation of attributes
           services shall not combine personal data relating to the provision of those
           services with personal data from any other services offered by them.

    2. Personal data relating to the provision of electronic attestation of attributes
           services shall be kept logically separate from other data held.

    3. Personal data relating to the provision of qualified electronic attestation of
           attributes services shall be kept physically and logically separate from any
           other data held.
    4. Providers of qualified electronic attestation of attributes' services shall provide
           such services under a separate legal entity.

    SECTION 10

    QUALIFIED ELECTRONIC ARCHIVING SERVICES

    Article 45g

    Qualified electronic archiving services

    A qualified electronic archiving service for electronic documents may only be
    provided by a qualified trust service provider that uses procedures and technologies
    capable of extending the trustworthiness of the electronic document beyond the
    technological validity period.

    Within 12 months after the entry into force of this Regulation, the Commission shall,
    by means of implementing acts, establish reference numbers of standards for
    electronic archiving services. Those implementing acts shall be adopted in
    accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article 48(2).

    SECTION 11

    ELECTRONIC LEDGERS

    Article 45h

    Legal effects of electronic ledgers

    1. An electronic ledger shall not be denied legal effect and admissibility as
           evidence in legal proceedings solely on the grounds that it is in an electronic
           form or that it does not meet the requirements for qualified electronic ledgers.

    2. A qualified electronic ledger shall enjoy the presumption of the uniqueness and
           authenticity of the data it contains, of the accuracy of their date and time, and
           of their sequential chronological ordering within the ledger.

    Article 45i

    Requirements for qualified electronic ledgers

    1. Qualified electronic ledgers shall meet the following requirements:

           (a) they are created by one or more qualified trust service provider or
                  providers;

           (b) they ensure the uniqueness, authenticity and correct sequencing of data
                  entries recorded in the ledger;

           (c) they ensure the correct sequential chronological ordering of data in the
                  ledger and the accuracy of the date and time of the data entry;

           (d) they record data in such a way that any subsequent change to the data is
                  immediately detectable.

    2. Compliance with the requirements laid down in paragraph 1 shall be presumed
           where an electronic ledger meets the standards referred to in paragraph 3.

    3. The Commission may, by means of implementing acts, establish reference
           numbers of standards for the processes of execution and registration of a set of
           data into, and the creation, of a qualified electronic ledger. Those implementing                     acts shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to
                     in Article 48(2).';

    (40) The following Article 48a is inserted:

              `Article 48a

              Reporting requirements

              1. Member States shall ensure the collection of statistics in relation to the
                      functioning of the European Digital Identity Wallets and the qualified trust
                      services.

              2. The statistics collected in accordance with paragraph 1, shall include the
                     following:

                     (a) the number of natural and legal persons having a valid European Digital
                             Identity Wallet;

                     (b) the type and number of services accepting the use of the European
                             Digital Wallet;

                     (c) incidents and down time of the infrastructure at national level preventing
                             the use of Digital Identity Wallet Apps.

              3. The statistics referred to in paragraph 2 shall be made available to the public in
                     an open and commonly used, machine-readable format.

              4. By March each year, Member States shall submit to the Commission a report
                     on the statistics collected in accordance with paragraph 2.';

    (41) Article 49 is replaced by the following:

              `Article 49

              Review

              1. The Commission shall review the application of this Regulation and shall
                      report to the European Parliament and to the Council within 24 months after
                      its entering into force. The Commission shall evaluate in particular whether it
                      is appropriate to modify the scope of this Regulation or its specific provisions
                      taking into account the experience gained in the application of this Regulation,
                      as well as technological, market and legal developments. Where necessary, that
                      report shall be accompanied by a proposal for amendment of this Regulation.

              2. The evaluation report shall include an assessment of the availability and
                      usability of the identification means including European Digital Identity
                      Wallets in scope of this Regulation and assess whether all online private
                      service providers relying on third party electronic identification services for
                      users authentication, shall be mandated to accept the use of notified electronic
                      identification means and European

              3. In addition, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament
                      and the Council every four years after the report referred to in the first
                      paragraph on the progress towards achieving the objectives of this Regulation.

    (42) Article 51 is replaced by the following:

              `Article 51

              Transitional measures
              1. Secure signature creation devices of which the conformity has been determined
                      in accordance with Article 3(4) of Directive 1999/93/EC shall continue to be
                      considered as qualified electronic signature creation devices under this
                      Regulation until [date ­ OJ please insert period of four years following the
                      entry into force of this Regulation].

              2. Qualified certificates issued to natural persons under Directive 1999/93/EC
                      shall continue to be considered as qualified certificates for electronic
                      signatures under this Regulation until [date ­ PO please insert a period of four
                      years following the entry into force of this Regulation].'.

    (43) Annex I is amended in accordance with Annex I to this Regulation;
    (44) Annex II is replaced by the text set out in Annex II to this Regulation;
    (45) Annex III is amended in accordance with Annex III to this Regulation;
    (46) Annex IV is amended in accordance with Annex IV to this Regulation;
    (47) a new Annex V is added as set out in Annex V to this Regulation;
    (48) a new Annex VI is added to this Regulation.

                                                        Article 2
    This Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in
    the Official Journal of the European Union.

    This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member States.
    Done at Brussels,

    For the European Parliament  For the Council
    The President                The President

            LEGISLATIVE FINANCIAL STATEMENT

    1.      FRAMEWORK OF THE PROPOSAL/INITIATIVE
    1.1.    Title of the proposal/initiative
    1.2.
    1.3.    Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on a framework for the
    1.4.    European Digital Identity, amending the eIDAS regulation
    1.4.1.
    1.4.2.  Policy area(s) concerned

    1.4.3.  Policy area: Internal Market
                            Europe fit for a digital age

            The proposal/initiative relates to:
             a new action
             a new action following a pilot project/preparatory action28
            the extension of an existing action
             a merger or redirection of one or more actions towards another/a new action
            Objective(s)
            General objective(s)

            The general objective of this initiative is to ensure the proper functioning of the
            internal market, particularly in relation to the provision and use of cross-border and
            cross-sector public and private services relying on the availability and use of highly
            secure and trustworthy electronic identity solutions. This objective feeds into the
            strategic objectives set out in the Communication "Shaping Europe's digital future".

            Specific objective(s)

            Specific objective No 1
            To provide access to trusted and secure digital identity solutions that can be used
            across borders, meeting user expectations and market demand;
            Specific objective No 2
            Ensure that public and private services can rely on trusted and secure digital identity
            solutions across borders;
            Specific objective No 3
            Provide citizens full control of their personal data and assure their security when
            using digital identity solutions;
            Specific objective No 4
            Ensure equal conditions for the provision of qualified trust services in the EU and
            their acceptance.

            Expected result(s) and impact

            Specify the effects which the proposal/initiative should have on the beneficiaries/groups targeted.

    28      As referred to in Article 58(2)(a) or (b) of the Financial Regulation.
    1.4.4.  Overall, the biggest expected beneficiaries of the initiative are end users/citizens,
            online service providers, Wallet App providers and public and private providers of
            digital identity services. The initiative is expected to provide access to trusted and
            secure digital identity solutions that can be used cross borders, meeting user
            expectations and market demand; to ensure that public and private services can rely
            on trusted and secure digital identity solutions cross-border; to provide citizens full
            control of their personal data and assure their security when using digital identity
            solutions; and to ensure equal conditions for the provision of qualified trust services
            in the EU and their acceptance.

            Besides the facility to access both public and private services, citizens and companies
            would directly benefit from the convenience and user-friendliness of the wallet
            authenticating interface and be able to engage in transactions requiring all levels of
            assurance (e.g. from login on social media to eHealth applications).

            A strengthened privacy-by-design approach could yield additional benefits since the
            wallet would not require intermediaries in the process of asserting the attributes, thus
            enabling the citizen to communicate directly with the service and credential
            providers. The increased data security of the wallet would prevent identity theft, thus
            preventing financial loss to European citizens and businesses.

            In terms of economic growth it is expected that the introduction of a standard-based
            system will reduce uncertainty for market actors, and is also expected to have a
            positive impact on innovation.

            And importantly, it is expected to provide more inclusive access to public and private
            services linked to public goods such as education and health, to which some social
            groups currently face some barriers. For instance, some citizens with disabilities,
            often those with reduced mobility, or living in rural areas may have lower access to
            services that normally require physical presence if not delivered locally.

            Indicators of performance

            Specify the indicators for monitoring progress and achievements.

    Monitoring and         Indicator                     Responsibility for collection Source(s)
    evaluation aspect and
    relevant objectives

    Application

    Provide access to eID  Number of European citizens   European Commission and  Annual
    means for all EU       and businesses issued with    National Competent       survey/M&E data
    citizens               notified eID-s / European     Authorities (NCA)        collected by NCAs
                           Digital Identity Wallets and
                           number of issued identity
                           credentials (attestations of
                           attributes) .
     Provide access to eID     Number of European citizens       European Commission and  Annual
     means for all EU          and businesses actively using     National Competent       survey/M&E data
     citizens                  notified eID-s / European         Authorities (NCA)        collected by NCAs
                               Digital Identity Wallets and                               Annual survey
     Increase cross-border     identity credentials
     recognition and           (attestations of attributes)                               Annual survey
     acceptance of eID
     schemes, with an          Number of online service          European Commission      Annual survey
     ambition to reach         providers accepting notified
     universal acceptance      eID-s / European Digital                                   Annual survey
                               Identity Wallets and identity                              Annual survey
     Increase cross-border     credentials (attestations of                               Eurostat
     recognition and           attributes)
     acceptance of eID
     schemes, with an          Number of online                  European Commission
     ambition to reach         transactions by notified eID-s
     universal acceptance      / European Digital Identity
                               Wallets and identity
    Stimulate adoption by      credentials (attestations of
    the private sector and     attributes) (total and cross-
    the development of new     border)
    digital identity services
                               Number of new privately           European Commission and
     Contextual information    issued attestation of attributes  National Competent
                               services meeting standards        Authorities (NCA)
                               for integration into the
                               European Digital identity
                               Wallet

    Stimulate adoption by      Size of the market for digital     European Commission
    the private sector and     identity
    the development of new                                       European Commission and
    digital identity services                                    National Competent
                                                                 Authorities
    Stimulate adoption by      Public procurement
    the private sector and     expenditure linked to digital     European Commission
    the development of new     identity
    digital identity services

    Increase cross-border      % of enterprises having e-
    recognition and            commerce sales of goods or
    acceptance of eID          services
    schemes, with an
    ambition to reach
    universal acceptance
    Increase cross-border  Share of online transactions  European Commission  annual survey
    recognition and        requiring strong customer     European Commission  Eurostat
    acceptance of eID      identification (total)
    schemes, with an
    ambition to reach      % of individuals doing e-
    universal acceptance   commerce
                           % of individuals accessing
    Provide access to eID  online public services
    means for all EU
    citizens

    1.5.    Grounds for the proposal/initiative
    1.5.1.
            Requirement(s) to be met in the short or long term including a detailed timeline for
    1.5.2.  roll-out of the implementation of the initiative

            This Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all Member
            States. Member States will be obliged to isse a European Digital Identity Wallet
            within 24-48 months (indicatively) of the adoption of the regulation. The
            Commission will be empowered to adopt implementing acts laying down the
            technical specifications and reference standards for the technical architecture of the
            European Digital Identity framework within 12-24 months (indicatively) of the
            adoption of the regulation.

            Added value of Union involvement (it may result from different factors, e.g.
            coordination gains, legal certainty, greater effectiveness or complementarities). For
            the purposes of this point 'added value of Union involvement' is the value resulting
            from Union intervention which is additional to the value that would have been
            otherwise created by Member States alone.

            Reasons for action at European level (ex-ante)

            Considering the growing demand from citizens, businesses and providers of online
            services for user friendly, secure and privacy friendly digital identity solutions that
            can be used cross border, further action at the EU level can bring greater value than
            action by individual Member States, as shown by the evaluation of the eIDAS
            Regulation.

            Expected generated Union added value (ex-post)

            A more harmonised approach at the EU level based on the fundamental shift from
            the reliance on digital identity solutions alone to the provision of electronic
            attestations of attributes would ensure that citizens and businesses can have access to
            public and private services anywhere in the EU relying on verified proofs of identity
            and attributes. Online service providers would be able to accept digital identity
            solutions independently of where they have been issued, relying on a common
            European approach to trust, security and interoperability. Users and service providers
            alike can also benefit from the same legal value provided to electronic attestations of
            attributes across the EU, which is particularly important when coordinated action is
            necessary, like when it comes to digital health certificates. Trust services providing
            electronic attestations of attributes would also benefit from the availability of a
    1.5.3.  European market for their services. For example, recuperating the costs to ensure a
    1.5.4.  highly trustworthy and secure environment for the provision of Qualified Trust
            Service is more easily off-set at EU level due to economies of scale. Only an EU
            framework can ensure full cross-border portability of legal identities and electronic
            attestation of attributes linked to it making it possible to trust identity assertions
            made by other Member States.

            Lessons learned from similar experiences in the past

            The eIDAS Regulation (Regulation 910/2014) (eIDAS) is the only cross-border
            framework for trusted electronic identification (eID) of natural and legal persons, and
            trust services. While eIDAS plays an undisputed role in the internal market, a lot has
            changed since its adoption. eIDAS, adopted in 2014, is based on national eID
            systems following diverse standards and focuses on a relatively small segment of the
            electronic identifications needs of citizens and businesses: secure cross-border access
            to public services. The services targeted mainly concern the 3% of EU's population
            residing in a Member State different from the one they were born in.

            Since then, digitalisation of all functions of society has increased dramatically. Not
            least has the COVID-19 pandemic had a very strong effect on the speed of
            digitalisation. As a result, the provision of both public and private services is
            increasingly becoming digital. Citizens and businesses' expectations are to achieve
            high security and convenience for any online activity such as submitting tax
            declarations, enrolling in a foreign university, remotely opening a bank account or
            asking for a loan, renting a car, setting up a business in another Member State,
            authenticating for internet payments, bidding to an online call for tender, and more.

            As a consequence, the demand for means to identify and authenticate online, as well
            as to digitally exchange information related to our identity, attributes or
            qualifications (identity, addresses, age, but also professional qualifications, driving
            licences and other permits and payment systems), securely and with a high level of
            data protection, has increased radically .

            This has triggered a paradigm shift, moving towards advanced and convenient
            solutions that are able to integrate different verifiable data and certificates of the
            user. Users expect a self-determined environment where a variety of different
            credentials and attributes can be carried and shared such as for example your national
            eID, professional certificates, public transport passes or, in certain cases, even digital
            concert tickets . These are so-called self-sovereign app-based wallets managed
            through the mobile device of the user allowing for a secure and easy access to
            different services, both public and private, under his or her full control.

            Compatibility with the Multiannual Financial Framework and possible synergies
            with other appropriate instruments

            The initiative supports the European recovery effort by providing citizens and
            businesses the with tools necessary, e.g. convenient eID and trust services to help
            them conduct their daily activities online in a trusted and secure way. Hence, it is
            fully in line with the objectives of the MFF.

            Operational expenditure is to be financed under DEP SO5. Procurement contracts
            supporting the development of standards and technical specifications, as well as the
            cost of maintaining the building blocks of the eID and trust services are estimated at
            up to 3-4MEURO annually. Exact allocation of this budget need is to be decided at
            the definition of future work programmes. Grants supporting the connection of    public and private services to the eID ecosystem would greatly support reaching the
    objectives of the proposal. The cost for a service provider to integrate the necessary
    API of the eID Wallet is estimated at around 25.000 EURO as a one-off cost per
    provider. If available, once the distribution of budget for the next work programme is
    being discussed, budget for grants of up to 0.5MEUR / Member State would support
    the connection of a critical mass of services.

    Expert group meetings related to the development of the implementing acts will be
    charged to the administrative part of DEP for a total amount of up to 0.5MEURO.

    Synergies with other instruments

    This initiative will provide a framework for the provision of electronic identity and
    electronic identity services in the EU, on which specific sectors can rely to fulfil
    sector specific legal requirements, for example related to digital travel documents,
    digital drivers licences etc. Similarly, the proposal is aligned with the objectives of
    the Regulation 2019/1157 which strengthens the security of ID cards and residence
    documents. Under this Regulation, Member States are obliged to implement new
    identity cards with the updated security features by August 2021. Once developed,
    Member States could upgrade the new identity cards so that they can be notified as
    eID schemes as defined under the IDAS Regulation .

    The initiative will also contribute to the transformation of the customs domain into a
    paperless electronic environment in the context of the initiative for developing an EU
    Single Window environment for customs. It should be also noted that the future
    proposal will contribute to the European mobility policies by facilitating the legal
    reporting requirements of the maritime operators set in the context of the European
    Maritime Single Window environment which will start applying form 15 August
    2025. The same goes for the articulation with Regulation on Electronic Freight
    Transport Information obliging Member States authorities to accept electronic freight
    information. The European Digital Identity Wallet App will also be able to handle
    the credentials related to drivers, vehicles and operations required by the EU legal
    framework in the field of road transport (e.g. digital driving licences / Directive
    2006/126/EC). Specifications will be further developed in the context of this
    framework. The future initiative could also contribute to the shaping of the future
    initiatives in the field of social security coordination, such as the possible
    development of a European Social Security Pass which could build on the trust
    anchors offered by the notified identities under eIDAS.

    This initiative supports the implementation of GDPR (2016/679) by putting the user
    in control over how the personal data is being used. It provides a high level of
    complementarity with the new Cybersecurity Act and its common cybersecurity
    certification schemes. Also, the need for IoT unique identity from eIDAS ensures
    consistency with the Cybersecurity Act and the need to cover a broader range of
    actors on top of persons and companies such as machines, objects, suppliers and IoT
    devices.

    The Single Digital Gateway Regulation (SDGR) has also important touchpoints and
    is in line with this initiative. SDGR's objective is to fully modernise public
    administrative services and facilitate online access to the information, administrative
    procedures and assistance services that citizens and businesses need when living or
    operating in another EU country. This initiative provides foundational elements to
    support the objectives of making the once only principle operational under the Single
    Digital Gateway.
    1.5.5.  Furthermore, there is coherence with the European Strategy for Data and the
            proposed Regulation on European Data Governance, providing a framework to
            support data driven applications in cases when the transmission of personal identity
            data is required allowing users to be in control and fully anonymised.

            Assessment of the different available financing options, including scope for
            redeployment

            The initiative will build on the building blocks for eID and trust services that were
            developed under the CEF programme, and which are being integrated into DEP.

            Member States can furthermore ask for financing for setting up/improving the
            infrastructure necessary from the RRF.
    1.6. Duration and financial impact of the proposal/initiative

            limited duration

           in effect from [DD/MM]YYYY to [DD/MM]YYYY

           Financial impact from YYYY to YYYY for commitment appropriations and from

    YYYY to YYYY for payment appropriations.

            unlimited duration

    Implementation with a start-up period from YYYY to YYYY,

    followed by full-scale operation.

    1.7. Management mode(s) planned29

            Direct management by the Commission

     by its departments, including by its staff in the Union delegations;

           by the executive agencies

            Shared management with the Member States

            Indirect management by entrusting budget implementation tasks to:

     third countries or the bodies they have designated;

     international organisations and their agencies (to be specified);

     the EIB and the European Investment Fund;

     bodies referred to in Articles 70 and 71 of the Financial Regulation;

     public law bodies;

     bodies governed by private law with a public service mission to the extent that they
    provide adequate financial guarantees;

     bodies governed by the private law of a Member State that are entrusted with the
    implementation of a public-private partnership and that provide adequate financial guarantees;

     persons entrusted with the implementation of specific actions in the CFSP pursuant to Title
    V of the TEU, and identified in the relevant basic act.

    If more than one management mode is indicated, please provide details in the `Comments' section.


    2.      MANAGEMENT MEASURES
    2.1.
            Monitoring and reporting rules
    2.2.
    2.2.1.  Specify frequency and conditions.

    2.2.2.  The Regulation will be reviewed for the first time two years after its full application
            and then every four years. The Commission must report on the findings to the
    2.2.3.  European Parliament and to the Council.

            Moreover, in the context of the application of the measures, Member States shall
            collect statistics in relation to the use and the functioning of the European Digital
            Identity Wallet and qualified trust services. The statistics shall be collected in a
            report which shall be submitted to the Commission on an annual basis.

            Management and control system(s)

            Justification of the management mode(s), the funding implementation mechanism(s),
            the payment modalities and the control strategy proposed

            The Regulation establishes more harmonised rules for the provision of eID and trust
            services in the internal market while ensuring the respect of trust and users' control
            over their own data. These new rules require the development of technical
            specifications and standards, and supervision and coordination of the activities of
            national authorities. In addition, the related building blocks for eID, eSignature etc
            will be managed and provided under DEP. There is also a need to take into
            consideration the resources needed to communicate and negotiate agreement with
            third countries on mutual recognition of trust services.

            In order to face these tasks, it is necessary to appropriately resource the
            Commission's services. The enforcement of the new Regulation is estimated to
            require 11 FTEs; 4-5 FTEs for legal work, 4-5 FTEs for focusing on the technical
            work, and 2 FTE for coordination and international outreach and administrative
            support.

            Information concerning the risks identified and the internal control system(s) set up
            to mitigate them

            One of the main issues leading to shortcomings of the current legislative framework
            is the lack of harmonisation of national systems. To overcome this problem in the
            current initiative, there will be a heavy reliance on reference standards and technical
            specifications to be defined in implementing acts.

            The Commission will be supported by an expert group in the development of these
            implementing acts. Furthermore, the Commission will work together with Member
            States already now to agree on the technical nature of the future system, to prevent
            further fragementation during the negoitation of the proposal.

            Estimation and justification of the cost-effectiveness of the controls (ratio of "control
            costs ÷ value of the related funds managed"), and assessment of the expected levels
            of risk of error (at payment & at closure)

            For the meeting expenditure of the expert group, given the low value per transaction
            (e.g. refunding travel costs for a delegate for a meeting if the meeting is physical),
            standard internal control procedures seem sufficient.
              Also for pilot projects to be carried out under DEP, normal DG CNECT standard
              procedures should be sufficient.

    2.3. Measures to prevent fraud and irregularities

                Specify existing or envisaged prevention and protection measures, e.g. from the Anti-Fraud Strategy.

              The existing fraud prevention measuers applicable to the Commission will cover the
              additional appropriations necessary for this Regulation.

    3.       ESTIMATED FINANCIAL IMPACT OF THE PROPOSAL/INITIATIVE

    3.1. Heading(s) of the multiannual financial framework and expenditure budget
              line(s) affected

    Existing budget lines

             In order of multiannual financial framework headings and budget lines.

                           Budget line                     Type of                   Contribution
                                                         expenditure

Heading of   Number                                      Diff./Non-     from        from             from third       within the
multiannual                                                diff.30     EFTA       candidate          countries       meaning of
                                                                      countries  countries32                     Article 21(2)(b) of
 financial                                                                                                          the Financial
framework                                                                 31                                         Regulation

    2        02 04 05 01 deployment                      Diff./       YES        NO                     /NO      NO

    2        02 01 30 01 support expenditure for the     ND

             Digital Europe Programme

    7        20 02 06 Administrative expenditure         ND           NO

    New budget lines requested
              In order of multiannual financial framework headings and budget lines.

                           Budget line                     Type of                   Contribution
                                                         expenditure

Heading of   Number                                      Diff./Non-     from       from              from third       within the
multiannual                                                 diff.      EFTA      candidate           countries       meaning of
                                                                      countries  countries                       Article 21(2)(b) of
 financial                                                                                                          the Financial
framework                                                                                                            Regulation

             [XX.YY.YY.YY]

                                                                      YES/NO YES/NO YES/NO YES/NO

    30       Diff. = Differentiated appropriations / Non-diff. = Non-differentiated appropriations.

    31       EFTA: European Free Trade Association.

    32       Candidate countries and, where applicable, potential candidates from the Western Balkans.

EN                                                   54                                                          EN
3.2.         Estimated financial impact of the proposal on appropriations
3.2.1.       Summary of estimated impact on operational appropriations

                The proposal/initiative does not require the use of operational appropriations
                The proposal/initiative requires the use of operational appropriations, as explained below:

                                                                                                                                 EUR million (to three decimal places)

             Heading of multiannual financial                Number 2
                           framework

             DG: CNECT                                               Year   Year   Year                      Year   Year   Year         TOTAL
                                                                     2022   2023   2024                      2025   2026   2027

 Operational appropriations                                                 The allocation of budget will be decided during the formulation of the work programmes.
                                                                            Numbers indicated are the minimum needed for maintenance and upgrade33.

Budget line34 02 04 05          Commitments                  (1a)    2.000  4.000  4.000                     4.000  4.000  4.000                                                                   22.000
                                                                     1.000  3.000  4.000                     4.000  4.000  4.000 2.000                                                             22.000
                                Payments                     (2a)

Budget line                     Commitments                  (1b)

                                Payments                     (2b)

Appropriations of an administrative nature financed from the
envelope of specific programmes35

Budget line 02 01 03 01         Commitments                    (3)   0.048  0.144  0.144                     0.072  0.072  0.072                                                                    0.552
                                Payments                     =1a+1b  2.048  4.144  4.144                     4.072  4.072  4.072                                                                   22.552
          TOTAL appropriations                                              3.144  4.144                     4.072  4.072  4.072 2.000                                                             22.552
               for DG CNECT                                     +3   1.048

                                                             =2a+2b

33           Should the actual cost exceed the amounts indicated, the costs will be financed by 02 04 05 01

34           According to the official budget nomenclature.

35           Technical and/or administrative assistance and expenditure in support of the implementation of EU programmes and/or actions (former `BA' lines), indirect research, direct research.

EN                                                                          55                                                                                                                             EN
                                                 +3

 TOTAL operational appropriations  Commitments   (4)                                                                         2.000  4.000  4.000  4.000  4.000  4.000         22.000
                                                                                                                             1.000  3.000  4.000  4.000  4.000  4.000 2.000   22.000
                                   Payments      (5)                                                                         0.048  0.144  0.144  0.072  0.072                 0.552
                                                                                                                             2.048                              0.072
 TOTAL appropriations of an administrative nature                                                                            0.048  4.144  4.144  4.072  4.072                22.552
                                                                                                                        (6)         4.144  4.144  4.072  4.072                22.552

financed from the envelope for specific programmes

    TOTAL appropriations           Commitments   =4+ 6                                                                                                          4.072
                                                                                                                                                                4.072
    under HEADING 2                                                                                                                                                    2.000

of the multiannual financial framework Payments  =5+ 6

EN                                                                                                                                  56                                                EN
    Heading of multiannual financial                    7     `Administrative expenditure'
                  framework

This section should be filled in using the 'budget data of an administrative nature' to be firstly introduced in the Annex to the Legislative
Financial Statement (Annex V to the internal rules), which is uploaded to DECIDE for interservice consultation purposes.

                                                                                                                                                                      EUR million (to three decimal places)

                                                              Year   Year   Year   Year     Year   Year   TOTAL
                                                              2022   2023   2024   2025     2026   2027

                 DG: CNECT              Appropriations        0.776  1.470  1.470  1.470    1.470  1.318         7.974
 Human resources                                              0.006  0.087  0.087  0.087    0.016  0.016         0.299
 Other administrative expenditure                             0.782  1.557  1.557  1.557    1.486  1.334         8.273

            TOTAL DG CNECT

        TOTAL appropriations            (Total commitments =  0.782  1.557 1.557 1.557 1.486 1.334               8.273
           under HEADING 7              Total payments)

of the multiannual financial framework

                                                                                                          thEUR million (to three decimal places)

                                                              Year   Year   Year   Year     Year   Year                 TOTAL
                                                              2022   2023   2024   2025     2026   2027

        TOTAL appropriations            Commitments           2.830  5.701  5.701  5.629    5.558  5.408  2.000                30.825
       under HEADINGS 1 to 7            Payments              1.830  4.701  5.701  5.629    5.558  5.406                       30.825
of the multiannual financial framework

EN                                                                   57                                                                                                                                      EN
3.2.2. Estimated output funded with operational appropriations

                                                                                         Commitment appropriations in EUR million (to three decimal places)

                                  Year                       Year         Year           Year        Year                                                Year           TOTAL
                                  2022                       2023         2024           2025        2026                                                2027

       Indicate                       Cost                       Cost           Cost
    objectives and

        outputs

                     Type Avera                                                                                                                                    Tot  Total
                     36                                                                                                                                  Cost al        cost
                            ge    N o
                                                      N o                                                                                                          No
                                                                             N o
                                                                                                       N o
                                                                                                                               N o
                                                                                                                                                    N o
                                                                                               Cost  Cost

                            cost

    SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE No 137...  To provide access to trusted and secure digital identity solutions that can be used across borders, meeting user expectations and
                                                                                                     market demand

    Annual surveys/studies        1 0.050 1 0.050 1 0.050.                            1        0.050 1 0.050 1 0.050 6 0.300

                                                                          05

    Subtotal for specific objective No 1 1 0.050 1 0.050               1  0.050       1        0.050 1 0.050 1 0.050 6 0.300

    SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE No 2 ...   Enusre that public and private services can rely on trusted and secure digital identity solutions across borders;

    Surveys/studies               1 0.050 1 0.050 1 0.050.                            1        0.050 1 0.050 1 0.050 6 0.300

                                                                          05

    Subtotal for specific objective No 2 1 0.050 1 0.050               1  0.050       1        0.050 1 0.050 1 0.050 6 0.300

    SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE No 3 ...   Provide citizens full control of their personal data and assure their security when using digital identity solutions;;

    Surveys/studies               1 0.050 1 0.050 1 0.050.                            1        0.050 1 0.050 1 0.050 6 0.300

    Subtotal for specific objective No 3 1 0.050 1 0.050               1  05
                                                                          0.050       1        0.050 1 0.050 1 0.050 6 0.300

    SPECIFIC OBJECTIVE No 4 ...             Ensure equal conditions for the provision of qualified trust services in the EU and their acceptance.

    Surveys/studies               1 0.050 1 0.050 1 0.050.                            1        0.050 1 0.050 1 0.050 6 0.300

                                                                          05

    Subtotal for specific objective No 4 1 0.050 1 0.050               1  0.050       1        0.050 1 0.050 1 0.050 6 0.300

36  Outputs are products and services to be supplied (e.g.: number of student exchanges financed, number of km of roads built, etc.).

37  As described in point 1.4.2. `Specific objective(s)...'

    TOTAL  4 0.200 4 0.200  4  0.200  4  0.200 4 0.200 4 0.200 24 1.200

    3.2.3. Summary of estimated impact on administrative appropriations

           The proposal/initiative does not require the use of appropriations of an

    administrative nature

           The proposal/initiative requires the use of appropriations of an administrative

    nature, as explained below:

                                                                                    EUR million (to three decimal places)

                                Year   Year   Year       Year                       Year    Year    TOTAL
                                2022   2023   2024       2025                       2026    2027

      HEADING 7                 0.776  1.470  1.470      1.470                       1.470   1.318  7.974
   of the multiannual           0.006  0.087  0.087      0.087                      0.0162  0.0162  0.299
  financial framework           0.782  1.557  1.557      1.557                       1.486   1.334  8.273

Human resources                 0.048  0.144  0.144      0.072                      0.072   0.072   0,552
                                0.048  0.144  0.144                                                 0,552
Other administrative                                     0.072                      0.072   0.072
expenditure

 Subtotal HEADING 7
   of the multiannual
  financial framework

                           38
Outside HEADING 7

   of the multiannual
  financial framework

Human resources

          Other expenditure
       of an administrative

                        nature

Put the admin costs under
                          DEP

         Subtotal
 outside HEADING 7
   of the multiannual
  financial framework

    TOTAL                       0.830  1.701  1.701      1.629                      1.558   1.406   8.825

    The appropriations required for human resources and other expenditure of an administrative nature will be met by
    appropriations from the DG that are already assigned to management of the action and/or have been redeployed within the
    DG, together if necessary with any additional allocation which may be granted to the managing DG under the annual
    allocation procedure and in the light of budgetary constraints.

    38     Technical and/or administrative assistance and expenditure in support of the implementation of EU programmes

           and/or actions (former `BA' lines), indirect research, direct research.
    3.2.4.     Estimated requirements of human resources
                  The proposal/initiative does not require the use of human resources.
                  The proposal/initiative requires the use of human resources, as explained below:

                                                                           Estimate to be expressed in full time equivalent units

                                                                       Year  Year  Year  Year          Year  Year

                                                                       2022  2023  2024  2025          2026  2027

        20 01 02 01 (Headquarters and Commission's Representation      4     8     8     8     8             7
        Offices)

        20 01 02 03 (Delegations)

        01 01 01 01 (Indirect research)

        01 01 01 11 (Direct research)

        Other budget lines (specify)

        20 02 01 (AC, END, INT from the `global envelope')             2     3     3     3             3     3

        20 02 03 (AC, AL, END, INT and JPD in the delegations)

                             39          - at Headquarters
        XX 01 xx yy zz

                                         - in Delegations

        01 01 01 02 (AC, END, INT - Indirect research)

        01 01 01 12 (AC, END, INT - Direct research)

        Other budget lines (specify)

        TOTAL                                                          6     11    11    11            11    10

               XX is the policy area or budget title concerned.

               The human resources required will be met by staff from the DG who are already assigned to management of the
               action and/or have been redeployed within the DG, together if necessary with any additional allocation which
               may be granted to the managing DG under the annual allocation procedure and in the light of budgetary
               constraints.

    Description of tasks to be carried out:

Officials and temporary staff            Officials will mainly carry out legal work, coordination activities and negotiations
External staff                           with 3rd countries and bodies related to mutual recognition of trust services.

                                         National experts should support with the technical and functional set-up of the system.
                                         AC should also support with technical tasks including management of the building
                                         blocks.

    39      Sub-ceiling for external staff covered by operational appropriations (former `BA' lines).
    3.2.5. Compatibility with the current multiannual financial framework

        The proposal/initiative:

        can be fully financed through redeployment within the relevant heading of the

    Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF).

        Explain what reprogramming is required, specifying the budget lines concerned and the corresponding
        amounts. Please provide an excel table in the case of major reprogramming.

        requires use of the unallocated margin under the relevant heading of the MFF

    and/or use of the special instruments as defined in the MFF Regulation.

        Explain what is required, specifying the headings and budget lines concerned, the corresponding
        amounts, and the instruments proposed to be used.

        requires a revision of the MFF.

        Explain what is required, specifying the headings and budget lines concerned and the corresponding
        amounts.

    3.2.6. Third-party contributions

        The proposal/initiative:

        does not provide for co-financing by third parties

        provides for the co-financing by third parties estimated below:

                                            Appropriations in EUR million (to three decimal places)

                          Year  Year  Year      Year  Enter as many years as necessary                 Total
                          N40   N+1   N+2       N+3      to show the duration of the
                                                            impact (see point 1.6)

Specify the co-financing
body

TOTAL appropriations
co-financed

    40  Year N is the year in which implementation of the proposal/initiative starts. Please replace "N" by the

        expected first year of implementation (for instance: 2021). The same for the following years.
    3.3. Estimated impact on revenue

                       The proposal/initiative has no financial impact on revenue.

                       The proposal/initiative has the following financial impact:

                        on own resources

                        on other revenue

                       please indicate, if the revenue is assigned to expenditure lines 

                                                   EUR million (to three decimal places)

                       Appropriations                  Impact of the proposal/initiative41

Budget revenue line:   available for

                       the current     Year  Year      Year  Year                                 Enter as many years as necessary to show

                       financial year  N     N+1       N+2   N+3                                  the duration of the impact (see point 1.6)

Article .............

                       For assigned revenue, specify the budget expenditure line(s) affected.

                       [...]

                       Other remarks (e.g. method/formula used for calculating the impact on revenue or any other
                       information).

                       [...]

    41                 As regards traditional own resources (customs duties, sugar levies), the amounts indicated must be net

                       amounts, i.e. gross amounts after deduction of 20 % for collection costs.
                                   ANNEX
        to the LEGISLATIVE FINANCIAL STATEMENT

                                                 Name of the proposal/initiative:

        Proposal for a Regulation on a framework for the European Digital Identity amending the eIDAS
                                                            regulation

    1.  NUMBER AND COST OF HUMAN RESOURCES CONSIDERED NECESSARY

    2.  COST OF OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENDITURE

    3.  TOTAL ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS

    4.  METHODS OF CALCULATION USED FOR ESTIMATING COSTS

    4.1. Human resources

    4.2. Other administrative expenditure

    This annex must accompany the legislative financial statement when the inter-services consultation is launched.

    The data tables are used as a source for the tables contained in the legislative financial statement. They are strictly
    for internal use within the Commission.
(1) Cost of human resources considered necessary
                  The proposal/initiative does not require the use of human resources
                  The proposal/initiative requires the use of human resources, as explained below:

                                                                                                    EUR million (to three decimal places)
         HEADING 7                                Year 2022          Year 2023            Year 2024              Year 2025           Year 2026           Year 2027             TOTAL

    of the multiannual financial  FTE Appropriations FTE Appropriations                FTE Appropriations     FTE Appropriations  FTE Appropriations  FTE Appropriations  FTE Appropriations
             framework

 Establishment plan posts (officials and temporary staff)

20 01 02 01 -

Headquarters and     AD           4                          608  7             1.064  7  1.064               7  1.064            7  1.064            6  912 38              5.776
                                                                                                                                                                               760
Representation

offices

                     AST          0                          -    1             152    1  152                 1  152              1  152              1  152              5

20 01 02 03 - Union  AD

Delegations          AST

YExternal staff [1]

20 02 01 and 20 02

02 ­ External AC                  1                          82   1             82     1  82                  1  82               1  82               1  82               6  492

personnel         ­

Headquarters and

Representation

offices              END          1                          86   2             172    2  172                 2  172              2  172              2  172 11              946

                     INT

                     AC

20 02 03 ­ External AL

personnel - Union END

Delegations          INT

                     JPD

Other HR related
budget lines
(specify )

    Subtotal HR ­                                            776 11             1.470 11  1.470 11               1.470 11            1.470 10            1.318 60            7.974

                                               6

     HEADING 7
4.3. The human resources required will be met by staff from the DG who are already assigned to management of the action and/or
          have been redeployed within the DG, together if necessary with any additional allocation which may be granted to the
          managing DG under the annual allocation procedure and in the light of budgetary constraints.

4.4.

4.5.

        Outside HEADING 7                    Year 2022           Year 2023           Year 2024           Year 2025           Year 2026           Year 2027            TOTAL
      of the multiannual financial
                                         FTE Appropriations  FTE Appropriations  FTE Appropriations  FTE Appropriations  FTE Appropriations  FTE Appropriations  FTE Appropriations
              framework

    01 01 01 01 Indirect AD
    Research42

    01 01 01 11 Direct Research AST
    Other (please specify)

                                    AC

    External staff  - at            END
    from            Headquarters    INT

    operational                     AC

    appropriations                  AL

    (former `BA' - in Union         END

    lines).         delegations

                                    INT

                                    JPD

    01 01 01 02 Indirect Research AC

    01 01 01 12 Direct research END
    Other (please specify)43
                                    INT

    Other budget lines HR related
    (specify)

    Subtotal HR ­ Outside
          HEADING 7

42           Please choose the relevant budget line, or specify another if necessary; in case more budget lines are concerned, staff should be differentiated by each budget line concerned

43           Please choose the relevant budget line, or specify another if necessary; in case more budget lines are concerned, staff should be differentiated by each budget line concerned
    Total HR (all MFF  6  0.776 11  1.470  11  1.470  11  1.470  11  1.470  10  1.318  60  7.974
        Headings)

The human resources required will be met by staff from the DG who are already assigned to management of the action and/or have been redeployed within the DG, together if necessary with
any additional allocation which may be granted to the managing DG under the annual allocation procedure and in the light of budgetary constraints.
4.6. Cost of other administrative expenditure
4.7.  The proposal/initiative does not require the use of administrative appropriations
4.8.  The proposal/initiative requires the use of administrative appropriations, as explained below:

                                                                                                       EUR million (to three decimal places)

                  HEADING 7                             Year 2022     Year 2023  Year 2024  Year 2025  Year 2026                               Year 2027  Total
    of the multiannual financial framework

At headquarters or within EU territory:                 0,006         0,015      0,015      0,015      0,015                                   0,015      0.081
                                                        0.006         0.072      0.072      0.072      0.0012                                  0.012      0.218
20 02 06 01 - Mission and representation expenses
                                                                      0.087      0.087      0.087      0.016                                   0.016      0.299
20 02 06 02 - Conference and meeting costs
20 02 06 03 - Committees44

20 02 06 04 Studies and consultations
20 04 ­ IT expenditure (corporate)45
Other budget lines non-HR related (specify where
necessary)
In Union delegations
20 02 07 01 - Missions, conferences and representation
expenses
20 02 07 02 - Further training of staff

20 03 05 ­ Infrastructure and logistics
Other budget lines non-HR related (specify where
necessary)

            Subtotal Other - HEADING 7
       of the multiannual financial framework

44  Specify the type of committee and the group to which it belongs.

45  The opinion of DG DIGIT ­ IT Investments Team is required (see the Guidelines on Financing of IT, C(2020)6126 final of 10.9.2020, page 7)
                                                                                                                  EUR million (to three decimal places)

                    Outside HEADING 7                       Year 2022  Year 2023 Year 2024  Year 2025  Year 2026                               Year 2027  Total
           of the multiannual financial framework             0.048                           0.072
                                                                       0.144  0.144                    0.072                                   0.072      0.552
    Expenditure on technical and administrative assistance    0.048                           0.072
    (not including external staff) from operational           0.054    0.144  0.144           0.159    0.072                                   0.072      0.552
    appropriations (former 'BA' lines):                                0.231  0.231                    0.088                                   0.088      0.851

       - at Headquarters

       - in Union delegations

    Other management expenditure for research
    Policy IT expenditure on operational programmes46
    Corporate IT expenditure on operational programmes47
    Other budget lines non-HR related (specify where
    necessary)

          Sub-total Other ­ Outside HEADING 7
           of the multiannual financial framework

            Total Other admin expenditure (all
                       MFFHeadings)

46  The opinion of DG DIGIT ­ IT Investments Team is required (see the Guidelines on Financing of IT, C(2020)6126 final of 10.9.2020, page 7)

47  This item includes local administrative systems and contributions to the co-financing of corporate IT systems (see the Guidelines on Financing of IT, C(2020)6126 final of

    10.9.2020)
5.      TOTAL ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS (ALL HEADINGS MFF)

                                                                                                             EUR million (to three decimal places)

        Summary                                       Year 2022  Year 2023  Year 2024  Year 2025  Year 2026  Year 2027  Total
                                                                              1.470      1.470
Heading 7 - Human Resources                             0.776      1.470      0.087      0.087    1.470      1.318      7.974
Heading 7 ­ Other administrative expenditure            0.006      0.087                          0.016      0.016      0.218
                                                                              0.144      0.072
        Sub-total Heading 7
                                                                              1.701      1.629
Outside Heading 7 ­ Human Resources                   0.048      0.144                            0.072      0.072      0.552
Outside Heading 7 ­ Other administrative expenditure  0.830      1.701                            1.558

        Sub-total Other Headings

        1. TOTAL                                                                                             1.406      8.825

    2.  HEADING 7 and Outside HEADING 7

(1) The administrative appropriations required will be met by the appropriations which are already assigned to management of the
          action and/or which have been redeployed, together if necessary with any additional allocation which may be granted to the
          managing DG under the annual allocation procedure and in the light of existing budgetary constraints.
    6.         METHODS OF CALCULATION USED TO ESTIMATE COSTS

    (a)        Human resources

        This part sets out the method of calculation used to estimate the human resources considered necessary
    (workload assumptions, including specific jobs (Sysper 2 work profiles), staff categories and the corresponding

                                                               average costs)

    1. HEADING 7 of the multiannual financial framework

                   2.     NB: The average costs for each category of staff at Headquarters are available on BudgWeb:
               3.      https://myintracomm.ec.europa.eu/budgweb/EN/pre/legalbasis/Pages/pre-040-020_preparation.aspx

    4.          Officials and temporary staff

    5.         7 AD officials (including 1 from CNECT/F.3 in 2023-2024) x 152.000 euro / year in 2023-2027 (half of that in 2022

    due to adoption expected mid 2022);

    6.         1 AST official x 152.000 euro / year in 2023-2027 (half of that in 2022 due to adoption expected mid 2022)

    7.

    8.          External staff

    9.         AC: 1 x 82.000 euro / year in 2023-2027 (half of that in 2022 due to adoption expected mid 2022) (indexation factor

    applied);

    10. END 2 x 86.000 euro / year in 2023-2027 (half of that in 2022 due to adoption expected mid 2022) (indexation

    factor applied);

    11.

    12. Outside HEADING 7 of the multiannual financial framework

    13.  Only posts financed from the research budget

    14.

    15.  External staff

    16.

    7.         OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENDITURE

                                    Give details of the method of calculation used for each budget line
                and in particular the underlying assumptions (e.g. number of meetings per year, average costs, etc.)

    17. HEADING 7 of the multiannual financial framework
    18. Bi-monthly committee meetings x 12.000 euro / meeting 2022-2024 to adopt implementing acts. After
    that annual committee meetings for adopting updated implementing acts.
    19. Mission are mainly Luxembourg-Brussels travels but also to attend conferences, meetings with Member
    States and other stakeholders.
    20.

    21. Outside HEADING 7 of the multiannual financial framework
    22. Expert group meetings are to be charged to the administrative line of DEP.
    23. It is expected to hold monthly meetings (à 12.000 EURO) during the preparation of implementing act
    (mid 2022-2024) and outside of that period of time, bi-monthly meetings are foreseen to ensure EU-wide
    coordination related to technical implementation.

    24.
